Facts DO Care About Your Feelings
Intro
Before we jump into things, I want to give a disclaimer, especially for those of you who may be watching who are Ben Shapiro fans. At no point in this video am I going to argue that reality is relative or that there's no such thing as truth or that facts don't exist. And I'm not even here to argue that Ben is wrong about everything.
I'm not going fall into that "post-modern neo-Marxist college professor" stereotype  -  that is not what I'm doing here. I'm not a philosopher  -  I'm an English teacher. I don't study metaphysics or ethics, I study words and how people use words. I teach people how to write, how to do research, how to frame that research in a way that makes sense and is intellectually honest.
And that's what I'm going to be doing today. I'm going to be looking at a particular set of words, and I'm going to figure out what they mean, and I'm going to analyze them for accuracy and intellectual honesty.
That is my goal. 
And with that lengthy disclaimer out of the way, let's get started.
Ben Shapiro is, apparently, "the cool kid's philosopher." And, while I don't actually know any "cool kids" who listen to him, he does have a huge platform and a lot of people who support him.
Ben has become famous for his catchphrase "facts don't care about your feelings." And this statement is now the battle cry of the Intellectual Dark Web  -  the group of brave academic outsiders who value logic, rationality, and free speech above all else. They believe that mankind can only prosper if we unchain the marketplace of ideas from the regulations of censorship and political correctness.
On the surface, this sounds great. I mean, rationality and facts are important, and we should use science to guide our laws and policies, instead of just doing things out of fear or because they "feel right", right?
Well, things are rarely that simple.
Now, this video isn't going to be me dunking on Ben Shapiro or Jordan B. Peterson or Sam Harris, or any of the other Intellectual Dark Web guys  -  more talented people than me have already done that. [insert hbomberguy aquaman image]
Instead, I want to take a look at the guiding philosophy of the Intellectual Dark Web  -  this "facts don't care about your feelings" thing. And I want to analyze this obsession over objectivity, reverence for rationality, and fixation on facts.
And ultimately, I want to show that facts do, in fact, care about your feelings.
Let's get started.
Data is Objective
I want to take you back about 300 years, to the period of time in European history known as the Enlightenment. This was the age of scientific breakthroughs in physics and biology, it was the time of great philosophical minds like Kant and Hume and Rousseau and Locke. [insert lost images]
It was a time when men valued science and logic and reasoning over the irrational emotional allure of religion and superstition. They trusted observations and the scientific method to find the truths about our world. In other words, they believed that there were objective facts, and that those facts were true whether we felt anything about them.
Now, clearly, things have changed a lot over the past 300 years. But a lot of our modern, "cool" philosophers base their worldview on these Enlightenment values. They argue that there are truths that have been discovered by scientists, and that a lot of folks on the left are simply ignoring those truths because they hurt their feelings.
This happens with things like climate change and trans issues and policing: The climate is not changing, or at least not due to human intervention, but activists feel like the climate is changing, so it must be. Being trans is a denial of basic biology, but trans people feel like they are a certain way, so we're told we have to respect that. Our policing systems in the US aren't racist, but Black Lives Matter folks feel like they are, so I guess they must be...facts be damned.
Dark Web Intellectuals like Shapiro see themselves as the torchbearers for truth. Facts are being overwhelmed by feelings, and they are the only people brave enough to stand up for the hard facts. Facts that are uncomfortable and might show us things that our feelings don't like, like that there's a difference in IQ between sexes and races.
And it's easy to see why this view is so attractive. You have the data on your side. You're just being objective. Yeah, the answers aren't always "politically correct," but that's a small price to pay for being right.
You have numbers. And numbers can't lie.
...or can they? What does it even mean to be "objective"? And where do we get this data from, anyway?
Well...let's find out.
Data is Ideological
Where Do Facts Come From?
So, when we first look at the idea that "facts don't care about our feelings," we first need to figure out what we mean by "facts." If facts are this objective and flawless end-all-be-all thing, it's worth looking into where they actually come from.
So, like I mentioned earlier, most of modern science is built on Enlightenment values. The scientific method was coming into being in the early days of the Enlightenment and it was being used by scientists like Isaac Newton and Antonie van Leeuwenhoek to discover new things and create inventions like modern microscopy and microbiology and...calculus.
--I'm an English professor and this is the second video in which I've brough up calculus. I think I'm doing something very wrong with my life.
These Enlightenment intellectuals pioneered new ways of asking questions and finding answers, and those methods are still being used by scientists today. We have tried-and-true methods of discovering truths about our world. We have experiments and models and statistics. We have very particular sets of rules for how to perform observations and what kind of language to use in our reporting of our observations.
And that's a good thing.
Facts Aren't Flawless
So what's wrong?
I mean, we do science, using good methodologies, so... Shouldn't that give us the "right answers" about the world around us?
Well... we don't just go out and scream our statistical quandaries into the void until we're blessed with infinitely wise and perfectly impartial data from the heavens.
Our stuff is made by people. And people are fallible. And biased. And just, like...gross.
Now, I'm not saying that all statisticians and scientists are liars. They aren't. At least not most of them. But they are human. And humans have cognitive biases and feelings.
Everywhere we go, everything we do, everything we experience is touched by human fallibility. Every single thing is filtered through our messy brains.
Now, this isn't to say that we can never get facts, or that facts don't exist. Remember, that's not what I'm arguing here.
What I'm saying isn't that facts don't exist. I'm saying that our perception of facts is reliant on feelings. It's reliant on the assumptions and biases that we all carry within us.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      "The bottom line is this: if you aren't an expert in a field (and you probably aren't), you don't know the facts. What you possess is knowledge of a subset of the facts, and how you decide what facts are included in that subset is of paramount importance. This filter is going to be determined by your background, your experiences, your social circle, your interests, and yes, by your feelings. How you feel about the political slant of news sources is going to determine which ones you prefer. How you feel about the underlying conclusion of research is going to determine what findings you emphasize and what findings you discard  --  as well as what research you seek out. You can't separate the influence your feelings have on the facts that you know."
This is how you can give two people the same news article, or have them watch the same debate, and have them end up with two entirely different ideas of the outcome. They saw the same thing -- they were presented with the same facts -- but their feelings (the biases and assumptions that they started with) changed the way they perceived those facts.
So...when Ben Shapiro says that...IQ differences between sexes and races is "just basic science" and "just the facts"... Consider which "facts" Ben has chosen to value; which sources he reads; what assumptions he's starting with.
And then consider the hundreds of articles by thousands of scientists and psychologists and sociologists and doctors that contradict what he's saying. Sources -- facts -- that he's choosing not to read, because those facts don't fit with his feelings.
Examples
Now, I know that some of you may not be on board with this idea yet. And that's okay.
So let's look at some examples. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
One thing that people think of as objective is photography. On the surface, it might seem like a photograph of something is an objective, neutral representation of that thing, right? But...what about the lighting? The angle? The type of lens or the aperture or shutter speed? [include two pictures of same thing but with different styles]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And what about, say, maps? Even GoogleMaps and GoogleEarth don't give us perfectly objective, factual representations of the world around us. Many of the pictures are grainy, or outdated; you might go to some city, or even to your home address, just to see that buildings are missing. The housing complex you live in hasn't even been built yetQ2. Your house doesn't exist, according to the objective GoogleMaps.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And sure, this is fine when the whole thing is theoretical or low-stakes like trying to find your house on GoogleMaps. But what about when it isn't? What about when people are using data to make real, substantial decisions? Like...where to send police patrols? Or...which prisoners get parole?
A lot of our penal system is starting to use modeling to help answer these questions because they believe models -- unlike the subjective opinion of judges and sheriffs -- are neutral. So they hire mathematicians and statisticians to build them these models: programs that take old data, learn from it, and then use it to make predictions. 
For instance, police use this software to decide where they should patrol -- they plug crime data into the program, then the program gives them a map showing where most crimes occur, and then the police send their officers to those areas. It just makes sense.
But...the thing about models is that they only output good information if you give them good information to start with. Are we sure they're doing that?
Our policing models are built on where do most crimes occur?, and they want to use that question to stop the biggest and worst crimes from happening, but a large number of crimes are "nuisance crimes"  - small-scale, non-violent crimes like vagrancy, panhandling, and drug use. And these nuisance crimes are more prevalent in poorer neighborhoods, so the map that the model gives you is just going to highlight the poor neighborhoods.
Yes, the data that's being output says that poor, black, and Hispanic neighborhoods are more likely to have more crimes. But your output is dependent on your input. If you have data for a bunch of crimes that are more prevalent in poor neighborhoods and that is the data you feed the program, then the program is going to tell you the poor neighborhoods are where crime is happening. 
And then you send your officers to those neighborhoods, they catch more crimes (because there are more people there to catch the "crimes"), which then justifies sending more officers there, and...it's a vicious cycle. Bad input begets bad output.
And this isn't theoretical. As mathematician and model-maker Cathy O'Neil describes in her book Weapons of Math Destruction:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
            "Reading, [Pennsylvania] police chief William Heim had to figure out how to get the same or better policing out of a smaller force. So, in 2013, he invested in crime prediction software made by PredPol... The program processed historical crime data and calculated, hour by hour, where crimes were most likely to occur. The Reading police force could view the program's conclusions as a series of squares, each one just the size of two football fields. If they spent more time patrolling these squares, there was a good chance they would discourage crime. And sure enough, a year later, burglaries were down by 23%. [But] this creates a pernicious feedback loop. The policing itself spawns new data, which justifies more policing [in that area]. So even if a model is color blind [as PredPol's founder stresses it is, saying that it "doesn't focus on the individual, instead it targets geography"], the result is anything but. In our largely segregated cities, geography is a highly effective proxy for race. ... PredPol, even with the best of intentions, empowers police departments to zero in on the poor, stopping more of them, arresting a portion of those, and sending a subgroup to prison. And the police chiefs, in many cases, if not most, think that they're taking the only sensible route to combating crime. That's where it is, they say, pointing to the highlighted ghetto on the map. And now they have cutting-edge technology (powered by Big Data) reinforcing their position there, while adding precision and `science' to the process. The result is that we criminalize poverty, believing all the while that our tools are not only scientific, but fair." (91)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
No one believes that the model is discriminatory, because it's numbers and "data" and "math" and "modeling" and those are all seen as neutral and objective. But they aren't. To once again quote O'Neil:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"Models, despite their reputation for impartiality, reflect goals and ideology. ... Our own values and desires influence our choices, from the data we choose to collect to the questions we ask. Models are opinions embedded in mathematics." (21).
Why Is This So Attractive? (Spoiler: People Aren't Rational)
So if facts are so squishy, why do we still rely on them for so much stuff?
Because, ever since the Enlightenment, we've idolized the rugged individualist, the scientist scholar, and we've put "objectivity" on a pedestal. We think that scientists are infallible; we think that numbers don't lie; we think that statistics are neutral.
And, again, I'm not saying that we should ignore all science and statistics and models because they're marred by human intervention, ALL HAIL OUR A.I. OVERLORDS!
We should trust scientists. But we should also acknowledge the shortcomings of "data". We need to see that data is dependent on feelings. Because we can't move past something if we don't know it's there.
And we do need to move past it. Because, as it stands, the perceived objectivity of data is causing some pretty serious problems.
You know how when you give someone bad news, you might say "Oh, I'm just the messenger." or "Don't shoot the messenger."? People do the same thing with data. Especially politicians. 
As philosopher Stephen Gaukroger puts it: "The reduction of things to raw numbers...becomes a form of control that allows complete abdication of responsibility. The numbers speak for themselves! Politicians and bureaucrats are no longer responsible for the decisions made, because all elements of personal judgement have been removed." (74-75)
In other words, when we think that numbers and stats are neutral and objective truths, we stop holding people responsible for things. "I'm not saying it -- that's just what the data says," is a cop-out. "Facts don't care about your feelings" is just a smokescreen to duck into after you've said something controversial and you're too afraid of the backlash.
Where do we go from here?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So what's the alternative? How do we fix all this?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For one, we need to reevaluate what we think of "objectivity." See, objectivity -- at least the way it's used in science -- doesn't mean total neutrality and indifference. Thinking this is the case is part of why people are so eager to appeal to "data" and "science" -- they see scientists as these inhumanly neutral entities.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Objectivity is actually acknowledgement of your biases and assumptions and preferences (all the things that make you human), and then working past them. Ignoring them or pretending you don't have them is a sure-fire way to fall prey to them.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We need to stop putting neutrality on a pedestal, stop thinking that scientists need to be aloof and unfeeling. Because feelings are actually a very important part of the fact-finding process. As education scholar Sir Ken Robinson puts it:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
            "When all the statistics have been coded and calculated, the columns and data carefully set out on the computer screen, there is still a need to analyze and interpret them  -  to give them meaning. At the heart of all scientific undertakings there is an element of personal judgment, which cannot be eradicated; nor should it be. The capacity for personal judgement is probably the most sensitive instrument a scientist has." (162)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So if you find someone who constantly brings up how objective or empirical or rational they're being, that should be a huge red flag. What you should look for instead is someone who acknowledges that they aren't objective, that they can't be, but that they see that and are working to move past it. Someone who says, "Hey, here's all my biases, let me lay them all out, and then we can work together to make sure they aren't clouding my vision."
We all have biases and assumptions and presuppositions and expectations and hopes and fears. We just need to be brave enough to face them. 
I want to close this section with a reading from Stephen Jay Gould's The Mismeasure of Man. This book is a masterpiece about science and race and racism in IQ testing and Gould is -- was -- an incredible writer, and he's kind of my science hero, and I highly recommend it if you enjoyed what I talked about today:
      "Impartiality (even if desirable) is unattainable by human beings with inevitable backgrounds, needs, beliefs, and desires. It is dangerous for a scholar even to imagine that he might attain complete neutrality, for then one stops being vigilant about personal preferences and their influences -- and then one truly falls victim to the dictates of prejudice. 
      Objectivity must be operationally defined as fair treatment of data, not absence of preference... No conceit could be worse than a belief in one's own intrinsic objectivity, no prescription more suited to the exposure of fools... The best form of objectivity lies in explicitly identifying preferences so that their influence can be recognized and countermanded...
      I criticize the myth that science itself is an objective enterprise, done properly only when scientists can shuck the constraints of their culture and view the world as it really is... I believe that science must be understood as a social phenomenon, a gutsy, human enterprise, not the work of robots."
Conclusion/Transition
So if science is squishy and bias is inevitable, then Ben Shapiro and the other Intellectual Dark Web guys aren't actually using facts. They're using feelings.
But their fans still listen to them and agree with them and are persuaded by them. ...Why?
How are their facts so persuasive...if they aren't actually facts? Why are people still listening to them?
People are still listening to them...precisely because they aren't using facts.
See, facts are dependent on ideology; facts do actually care about your feelings. BUT...Your feelings...they don't care about facts.
...
Stay tuned for my next video where I'm going to look at what actually gets people invested, but which has garnered a pretty bad reputation as a persuasive technique:
We're going to talk...about stories.
End Crawl
[Add "stay til the end for poetry reading" on screen, alongside names of patrons] 
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! There was a lot that I cut out of the script, so let me know if you want me to do another follow-up about debate-bro culture, because there's so much there that I want to talk about, like there's this whole idea of bravado rationalism that I desperately tried to fit in, but then this would have been like an hour long, but I can definitely do a mini-video all about it if you're interested.
I do have a couple real quick announcements: First, I am going to be doing a Q&A video at the beginning of April, so if you have questions for me, I'm going to start with patron questions, and then I'll move on to taking questions from a community post on my channel that you can comment on. 
And -- I don't know if I need to say this, but -- keep the questions kind, please.
Second, you may have noticed that there were no mid-roll ads in this video. That's thanks to my patrons, whose names should be showing up here, and thanks in particular to my Necromancer patron Becky Meacham, and especially to my highest tier patrons -- the Eldritch Abominations known as Zowber and Cig-Wuh (I apologize if I mispronounced your names -- feel free to send me a message and yell at me).
To honor these fine folks, I'm going to read two short poems that I composed especially for them:
Why = mx+b (for Becky Meacham)
The horizon was a line
interrupted by curves:
the hills sloped upwards, 
rising over running rivers.

Now, our scatterplot hills
are interrupted by outliers:
towers spitting smoke,
jutting up and up and up.

How do you calculate
the infinite losses of the earth?
Is there an equation for desperation
that doesn't result in imaginary numbers?

March for the Mountain Child (for Sauberflaut)
When the frost melts,
revealing brown grass -- 
so beautiful
after the noxious whiteness
of winter -- and those 
cold mornings give way 
to almost-warm afternoons,

then you find the springtime
marvelous. 
Squishing mud underfoot,
toes numb, you run and
run up the hillside
until you swear 
you can touch
the sky.

If you liked those, feel free to join us on Patreon, linked in the description.
And until next time... Stay safe, stay warm, and I will see y'all again soon, I hope. Bye folks 😊
Your Feelings Don't Care About Facts
Intro
Before we jump into things, I want to say that this is a sequel to another video, so if you haven't watched that one, "Facts DO Care About Your Feelings," be sure to go watch it first. It'll be in the description and in a card, here, so if you haven't watched it -- go do that. If you have watched it, then let's get started.
In my last video, I talked about how facts do care about your feelings. I talked about how all of science and statistics and data -- all that stuff we think is objective -- is filtered through layer after layer of feelings.
And that's not to say that facts don't exist, or that science is useless. It's to say that we need to be careful when people say that they're "just being objective," because...that's usually a big red flag that they are not objective.
When I closed out the video, I suggested that people like Ben Shapiro who say that all their views are based on facts aren't actually using facts at all. They're using something else, something that makes their arguments really enticing...
[cut to clip from final few seconds of last video's main content]
So, yes...today we are going to talk about why facts aren't very persuasive, why stories are persuasive, and what that means for modern ~discourse~.
Let's get started 😊
Data Bad
In the last video, I talked about how objectivity and data and statistics have gotten this reputation for being the best...everything. Just being the best.
We think that giving people numbers and charts and hard evidence is the best way to convince people of things. I mean...you can't argue with facts, right?
So...to talk about this, I need to bring out my English teacher ammo and talk about The Rhetorical Triangle. Now, before you click off, I promise this isn't going to be an English 101 lesson or a philosophy lecture. Just bear with me.
So the Rhetorical Triangle is basically just a graphical representation of tools you use to make arguments. We have Logos (which is the "data" you use to back up your argument), Ethos (which is your credibility, how much the audience trusts you), and Pathos (which is your emotional appeal -- how much you can pull at your audience's heart strings). 
Classically speaking, these three should be relatively even, but depending on the context of whatever your saying or writing, you might favor one over the other.
The way things are right now -- at least how we think they are, and how a lot of folks want it to be -- is like this. We're overloaded on Logos. We should be arguing and determining things and changing people's minds based on facts and logic...only.
Ethos...isn't really important -- doesn't really matter to most people, but Pathos...if you even kind of, maybe get emotional about things, you've automatically lost the argument. No one will take you seriously.
This is what education scholar Thomas Newkirk calls the "mythology of facts," where "facts are solid, verifiable, `true'. Opinions on the other hand are suspect and challengeable, tainted by bias." Facts over feelings.
But "facts over feelings," as much as we'd maybe love for it to be true...just isn't.
Our brains have a really hard time being rational. Economist Daniel Kahneman has spent his whole career exploring all the ways our brains are irrational; his book Thinking, Fast and Slow is basically a 500-page crash course in cognitive bias. (And, as a side note, I love this book, and might do a deep dive into it itself, if anyone would be interested in that.)
Numbers are hard for us to conceptualize -- like, imagine a chair. Now imagine 10 chairs. Easy-peasy, right? What about 100? That's...probably still do-able. 
Now imagine a million chairs. Or 1 billion chairs. Or a trillion chairs. Chances are, those three images weren't actually all that different from one another. It's a shit ton of chairs, but how much bigger is a trillion than a million, really? 
To our brains...not all that different. Theoretically, abstractly, you understand the math, but the full weight -- the reality of the sheer number of chairs -- isn't something the human brain is capable of grasping.
As Joseph Stalin is quoted as saying: If only one many dies of hunger, that is a tragedy. If millions die, that's only statistics.
So, because we have a hard time conceptualizing data like this, it's hard for that data to actually do anything in there. It's hard for it to stick -- and if you want to change someone's mind, whatever you say needs to stick.
This is especially the case when it comes to data that conflicts with someone's worldview or their values. These values often become literally hardwired in your brain's chemistry, and, according to psycholinguist -- and my hero -- George Lakoff, 
      "In most cases, the neural wiring -- and your identity -- stay, and the facts are ignored, dismissed, ridiculed, or attacked. It takes extraordinary openness, training, and awareness of this phenomenon to pay crucial attention to the vast number of facts we are presented with each day."
In other words, it's not impossible for facts to change our minds, but it's pretty dang hard.
Stories Good
So what else is there? What can our brains connect with, what does have the power to change our minds?
Well...stories. Stories and metaphors and anecdotes.
Now, that last one -- anecdotes -- is...kind of a touchy word. If you've ever witnessed an argument on Twitter or Facebook or Reddit, then you know the drill. The moment someone brings in any amount of their personal experiences, the other person immediately shuts them down for "anecdotal evidence".
Anecdotes, and stories in general, have a bad reputation when it comes to ~discourse~. To use an anecdote, myself, in my classroom, whenever we discuss research, I constantly have students talk about how good research doesn't have any personal experience. It's all data and numbers. It's impersonal, aloof...inhuman, even.
And it's true that personal experience isn't a replacement for hard science and facts and data. But it is...the language of our brains. Stories -- feelings -- are the best way to actually connect with someone.
As an English teacher, I'm telling you: If you're writing something argumentative, use feelings. That's how you really connect with an audience.
Because we have minds made for stories. Everything we do, every time we explain something, we explain using stories. 
Think about the news: No matter what happens, there's a plot. Somebody did something and got some result. There's intrigue.
This is even the case in science. When we explain a scientific concept to someone, we give life and agency to things that usually don't have it.
"Certain molecules are hydrophobic, which means they don't like water." But molecules can't actually fear anything. They don't care. It's chemistry. But we understand it through story.
"John won his battle with cancer." But it's not a battle. Cancer cells aren't literally battling with the healthy ones.
Law is also like this. Lawyers -- prosecutors and defense -- are telling two different versions of a story: One where the defendant did it, and one where they didn't. And sure, they use hard evidence to help them tell their stories. But at the end of the day, the jury's decision comes down to which side had the better story.
And this is the case even for the subject maybe the furthest from storytelling: math. Now, you might be thinking that I'm going to bring up word problems where, like, Jose and Cindy need to figure out how many feet of streamers they need for their party, and then they have to convert it to yards when they go to the party supply store, and how all of this would be a thousand times easier if we just used the metric system -- 
And yeah, that last part is true, but I'm actually not talking about word problems. I'm talking about...just math. Just the normal way we talk about math. Because it's full of metaphor. To once again quote my fave George Lakoff:
      "If any area has been taken to be literal, disembodied, and objective, it is mathematics. Yet...mathematics too is metaphorical through and through. Take the number line. Numbers don't have to be points on a line. It is a metaphor that Numbers Are Points on a Line ... Mathematics turns out not to be a disembodied, literal, objective feature of the universe but rather an embodied, largely metaphorical, stable intellectual edifice constructed by human beings with human brains living in our physical world." (270).
We use metaphors to help make things visible to our brains. Our brains have a hard time conceptualizing abstract things, and metaphors make those abstractions concrete. And then stories contextualize those metaphors. We want winners and losers; we want good guys who we can root for; we want tension and action and redemption arcs.
Think about mythology -- myths are just how groups of people thousands of years ago conceptualized nature and disasters and seasons and pain and relationships and all the unexplainable phenomena around them. They understood the world through stories.
These things -- these stories, these metaphors, these concrete images -- are what affect us. Not numbers.
Conclusion (anecdotal evidence is OK, actually)
Just like with my last video, I don't want the point that you take away from this to be "oh, so science is fake and we should just ignore everything and base every single decision on feelings."
...no.
My end goal with this video and the last one is just to help bring balance back to the Rhetorical Triangle. Our society has had this obsession with logos -- with facts and logic -- and a lot of that is due to guys like Ben Shapiro. 
But this isn't necessarily a partisan issue, either. In fact, one of my sources for these two videos was an article written for the school paper at Hillsdale College, which is a pretty hard-line conservative school; in the article, the author says that 
      "facts are facts, regardless of a person's feelings. But feelings don't care about your facts either, and everyday conversation between liberals and conservatives proves the futility of facts as a persuasive tool... The power of story is that it shows rather than tells. And that is the difference between appealing to feelings and assaulting with facts."
Science and data and facts and objectivity are all good things. But they shouldn't be the entirety of how we make decisions or form arguments. Feelings -- stories, metaphors, anecdotes -- are important; just as important as facts.
It's not facts over feelings. But it's also not feelings over facts.
It's facts and feelings.
As education scholar Sir Ken Robinson says, 
      "A world without feelings would be literally inhuman...It's through feelings as well as through reason that we find our real creative power. It's through both that we connect with each other and create the complex, shifting worlds of human culture." (167)
So, the next time someone accuses you of being too emotional or using anecdotal evidence -- well, point them to this video first -- but also tell them that anecdotes may not be the best data, but they are the best way to actually communicate -- to really connect with another person. And isn't that what conversations are all about?
I want to close with a reading from the book Minds Made for Stories by Thomas Newkirk. This book was pretty much the foundation of this whole video, and if you are an English teacher or a writer of any kind, I highly recommend it.
      "When we rely on stories we are accused of being `anecdotal,' not intellectually serious. We are told that on the job and in college, we do the hard stuff, the rigorous stuff; we analyze and make logical arguments. We don't tell stories.
      But we do. We can't get away from it. 
      We rely on stories not merely for entertainment, but for explanation, meaning, self-understanding. We instinctively make connections of cause and effect, and always have. To deny the centrality of narrative is to deny our own nature. We are not made for objectivity and pure abstraction -- for timelessness. We have `literary minds' that respond to plot, character, and details in all kinds of writing.
      If we were godlike, [according to Plato], we could dispense with metaphors and analogies and approximations; we could see the truth directly.
      But as humans, as time-bound mortals, we must tell stories."
End Crawl
[Add "stay til the end for poetry reading" on screen, alongside names of patrons] 
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! Be sure to like and subscribe and ring the bell and do all those YouTube things -- you know what to do; you've been here before.
I am still taking questions for my Q&A video, so if you have questions for me, I'm going to start with patron questions, and then I'll move on to taking questions from a community post on my channel. 
Now, you may have noticed that there were no mid-roll ads in this video. That's thanks to my patrons, whose names should be showing up here, and thanks in particular to the Eldritch Abominations known as Zowber and Cig-Wuh.
To honor my newest Necromancer patron Xalthizan, along with Cig-Wuh who didn't get a poem last time, I am going to be reading two poems that I've written:
Viral (for Xalthizan)
I fall in love with the whole world
over and over, until they all become objects
of my affections. And then I give each object
a bit of myself, until I am no longer
whole.

Will I live on inside them?
Will each object, like a golem,
be given life by my soul
shattered among them?

Or am I a phytoplasmid,
seeping into an already occupied
space -- taking over
or dying out?


Rulings, not Rules (For Sigve)
It is my belief that every criminal case
should be tried not in a courthouse
but in a board game store -- 

No more witness stands,
muffled sobs, Your Honors.

Give me too-close card tables
and crit-hit, fist-pumping shouts 
punctuated with clattering dice.

Where every rule is a maybe,
and every decision made by
group consensus, fair to all.
You can certainly try,
and I'll allow it, 
and the only death
penalty is a new,
crisp, clean,
character sheet.

If you liked that, feel free to join us on Patreon, link in the description.
And until next time...Stay safe, stay warm, and I will see y'all again soon, I hope. Bye folks 😊
Script: The Politics of Food
WHITE TRASH Food: Why do poor people eat "like that"?
Intro
Consider the lobster. The lobster is a modest shellfish, but it's garnered a reputation for being fancy, in part because of how expensive it is, pound-for-pound. 
Lobster is the kind of thing your parents taught you to never order at restaurants when someone else is footing the bill, because it'd make you look like a selfish jerk.
But lobster wasn't always the fancy wealthy-people food we know it as today. 
In fact, in the 18th and 19th centuries, lobster was a trash food. There was an abundance of lobster in the coastal cities of the U.S.. There was more lobster than they knew what to do with. 
They had to get rid of it, but no one wanted to eat it. So they fed it to prisoners and indentured servants and slaves.
So what changed? How did the humble lobster climb the social ladder and go from being cheap and disregarded to being one of the most decadent dishes on restaurant menus?
Well...summer vacation.
Seasonal tourists  -  mostly wealthy  -  came to Boston (which had a booming lobster industry) to vacation, and  -  like any good tourists  -  wanted an "authentic" taste of the city. So...they ate lobster. Lots of lobster. ...and didn't hate it.
When they went back home to Washington or New York, they still craved lobster, though. But they couldn't get that good Boston lobster anymore. So they sent away for it  -  mail-ordered lobster straight from the source  -  and they were willing to pay quite the premium for it.
So, obviously, the Bostonians obliged. I mean, they really wanted to get rid of all this lobster at any cost. They shipped out the lobster at exorbitant prices, which then made lobster expensive, which then gave the impression that it was fancy, which meant more wealthy people wanted to eat it, which continued this feedback loop until lobster became what it is today:
...expensive.
Somehow, a food once eaten only by poor and marginalized people became a food for the elite. The wealthy's desire for that "authentic" experience made it so that "authentic" dish made its way up the social ladder. But...the people never did. As the lobster became wealthy, the poor who had once eaten it...stayed poor.
Trash Food
I want you to think of the trashiest food you can imagine. It can be something pre-packaged, or something you prepare, but either way, it needs to be trashy. In fact, put it in the comments  -  I want to see what your opinions are on trash food.
Got it? Good. Now...would you eat it?
If you answered "no,"...why not? What is it about that food that is so appalling to you?
Now I want you to imagine the person who you think would eat it. What is that person like? What kind of clothes are they wearing? What does their body look like? ...What color is their skin?
Why do you think they are eating that food? What makes that food palatable to them, when it isn't palatable to you?
Now, put a pin in that, and keep it in the back of your head as we go.
Now, "trashy" means different things to different people. For some, it's the same as "tacky" where it describes something with the veneer of quality or elegance, but which is actually just a cheap knock-off. For others, though, "trashy" elicits the idea of "white trash" (which is the specific brand of trashiness I'll be focusing on in this video.)
"White trash" is similar to tackiness, except that when a person is "tacky" they are trying to hide the actual lack of value of what they're wearing or doing, but a person who is "white trash" almost...takes pride in it?
White trash people are people who know their clothes, foods, appearance, and actions, are outside the norm, but don't care to actually try to get back into the norm.
So what is white trash food? Well...food that white trash people eat, obviously.
But what does it actually look like? To answer this, I want to turn to the article that inspired this episode: "Trash Food" by Chris Offut. In this article, Offut talks about how he  -  a man who grew up poor in Kentucky  -  had to fight his whole life to not be seen as "white trash," and one of the things that labeled him that way was the food he ate. 
In the article, he lists a few "white trash" foods: "Within certain communities, it's become popular to host "white trash parties" where people are urged to bring Cheetos, pork rinds, Vienna sausages, Jell-O with marshmallows, fried baloney, corndogs, RC cola, Slim Jims, Fritos, Twinkies, and cottage cheese with jelly. In short -- the food I ate as a kid in the hills."
If you do a quick google search of trashy foods, you find articles and listicles and reddit posts listing things like tuna casseroles, Velveeta "queso," seven-layer dip, sloppy joes, and pigs in a blanket. 
So...what makes these foods "white trash"? Well...I've come up with a few general characteristics that they all have in common.
White trash food is...
   1) --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Cheap (inexpensive ingredients, or available in bulk)
   2) --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      It has a Long Shelf-Life (i.e. not fresh, not organic)
   3) --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Simple (easy to eat or prepare)
   4) --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Made of Versatile Parts (its ingredients can be used in a variety of dishes)
So now the questions is...what makes these elements trashy? Well, to answer that, we need to realize that food isn't a neutral thing  -  its tied to culture, ethnicity, availability, seasonality, and...class. 
See, "white trash" food isn't inherently bad, it's only bad because of what it implies about the people who eat it.

Food and Class
To explore this concept a little more, let's return to Chris Offut's "Trash Food." He ties food to class this way:
      "The term `white trash' is an epithet of bigotry that equates human worth with garbage. It implies a dismissal of the group as stupid, violent, lazy, and untrustworthy... The term `trash food' is not about food, it's coded language for social class. It's about poor people and what they can afford to eat. ... The term "white trash" is class disparagement due to economics."
The thing about all the foods we listed earlier  -  and the characteristics that define them  -  is that they are all...poor people food. "White trash food" is just another term for "poor people food."
But why is it "poor people food"?
Well...
"Cheap"  -  is obvious. You want foods that you can get in bulk for cheaper because, well, it's just cheaper. And even for things like animal meat  -  like deer or squirrel, or even farm-raised cattle  -  pound-for-pound it's way cheaper to hunt it or raise it yourself than it is to buy it.
Foods having a long shelf life is also good. It means that you can buy a bunch of food right after you get your paycheck, and then that food will last you until your next paycheck. It means you can stock up, which is especially useful if you do seasonal work.
Foods being simple and being made of versatile parts means that they are easy to prepare, and part of that ease comes from being able to just throw a bunch of shit together and knowing it will taste good. I mean, try this: Take a box of pasta (or any starch  -  you can use rice or potatoes, if you prefer), plus two cans of any kind of vegetable, add some cheese, maybe a canned meat, and then throw it in the oven for 30 minutes at 400F. Chances are, it's going to be a pretty good.
This is actually something I do a lot. I make these "starch + vegetables + cheese (+ meat)" casseroles a ton. I do Rotini or Farfalle (bowties), plus can of tomatoes and can of spinach, plus mozzarella or parmesan cheese, maybe add in some canned chicken, and it's really good. Or I also do rice, can of tomatoes, can of corn, can of black beans, plus some shredded cheddar and maybe some ground beef. It's also really good. Casseroles are cheap and easy and they taste good.
Foods that are inexpensive, last a long time, are really easy to prepare a lot of different dishes from, and that taste good are really valuable, especially to working-class families. But now, because of poor, working-class, and other marginalized people's history of making and eating these kinds of foods, our culture associates cheap foods with poor people. And if there's one constant in American culture, it's that we...kinda hate poor people. 

My Experience
Now, I'm sure there are people in the comments telling me "How dare you! How dare you talk about white trash people like this! Look at you  -  all dressed up, drinking wine (this is cranberry juice, actually)  -  you don't know the first thing about how these people live."
Well...(get off chair and change clothes)
...
I'm from Appalachia. I'm from a small town, and my family lived outside of "town"  -  we lived out on a ridge, far enough that we didn't have cable TV, and had dial-up internet and only had cell-phone service on a good day.
We had a garden and a barn and I played in the woods and never wore shoes.
We were also...pretty poor. Like everyone in our town was. We were too far north to be real coal country, and too far south and too far east to be in the rust belt. Our town was an oil-and-gas town. We had pipeliners come through, raise our housing costs, ruin our land, and then leave. Then with industry dying, poverty and drug abuse seeped in even worse than before.
The default setting of our town was white trash. I grew up being West Virginia garbage. And we ate garbage  -  at least by the standards of outsiders. We ate casseroles, bologna sandwiches, pepperoni rolls, grits, deer, squirrel.
We had a dessert called "potato candy" that was literally just a tablespoon of boiled mashed potato mixed with 3 or 4 cups of powdered sugar, rolled out, covered in peanut butter, rolled back up, and cut into bite-size pieces. It had a similar taste and texture to CowTails (which I think are also a white-trash candy, so... I don't know if there's a "classy" analogue to potato candy).
We literally had a dish my family unironically called  -  and I'm not making this up  -  "White Trash Casserole"
We ate trash. We ate "good" food too  -  homemade "ethnic" foods, baking from scratch, good (and good for you) foods made from what we picked from our garden. 
But when I was growing up, I didn't really see the distinction between "good" food and "trash" food. It was all just...food. It all tasted good; it was all relatively easy to make; it was (mostly) inexpensive.
Just like Chris Offut, I didn't realize that I ate trash until I left my hometown to go out and be an adult  -  or whatever. It wasn't until I left my family's little holler in the hills that I realized just how trashy I really was.
I definitely felt a little embarrassed. When I realized that casseroles are  -  apparently  -  a white trash thing, I was...surprised. Like...why? Do you not realize just how cheap and easy casseroles are to make? And they taste really good?! WHY would you not want to eat casseroles????
Around the time I started to accept my upbringing instead of fighting it, a weird thing started to happen...
(Cut to Fallout 76 trailer)
West Virginia  -  and Appalachian culture in general  -  became...mainstream?
Things like Fallout 76 (for better or worse) and Hillbilly Elegy (for better or worse) started to make their way into the public consciousness. Suddenly, people knew West Virginia was a state. They knew all the words to Country Roads. They knew what pepperoni rolls were.
And they loved it. 
Just like Christ Offut's experience with "white trash parties," I was starting to see people do the same thing with my backwards, trashy Appalachian foods. 
They were being celebrated.
...
Now, you'd think this would be a good thing, right? And yeah, to some extent it was. I don't have to constantly explain that  -  no, I'm not from Western Virginia, and yes, West Virginia is actually a state. 
But it was also...just weird. It was weird to see things I'd been made fun of for most of my adult life suddenly celebrated and (literally) devoured by the upper echelons of society.
Suddenly, what I ate wasn't weird anymore. Well, it wasn't bad weird. It was more...weird in a "cool, novelty" kind of way.
But is that a good thing? I mean...what is it that has so suddenly turned the tables and made my Appalachian trash foods acceptable? 
Well...nothing good.

The Problem
So what's the actual problem with "trash food"? It's the term used for the foods poor people eat, but now that "white trash" potlucks are getting popular, isn't that a good thing? Doesn't that mean that now the stigma will be gone and poor, "white trash" folks can eat whatever they want without judgment?
Well...not quite.
      "Implicit in the menu [of "white trash parties"] is a vicious ridicule of the people who eat such food on a regular basis. People who attend these..."parties" are cuisinally slumming, temporarily visiting a place they never want to live. They are the worst sort of tourists  --  they want to see the Mississippi Delta and the hills of Appalachia but are afraid to get off the bus."
See...when people "celebrate" these foods, they aren't actually celebrating the people who actually eat these foods. They're putting on the costume of "poor, white trash person" and wearing it around for fun. Because it tastes good, and it's fun to pretend to be something you're not.
I mean, imagine being so poor that you eat garbage like Fritos or bologna  -  gross! haha
But, the thing is, when someone wears the costume of "poor person" they aren't breaking boundaries or ending stigma. They're just perpetuating classism.
The entire concept of trash food is...classist. Because it's not just about the food. It's never been about the food. It's about the people, and seeing them as less than people. Seeing them as trash:
      "Economic status dictates class and diet. We arrange food in a hierarchy based on who originally ate it until we reach mullet, gar, possum, and squirrel -- the diet of the poor. The food is called trash, and then the people are.
      When the white elite take an interest in the food poor people eat, the price goes up. The result is a cost that prohibits poor families from eating the very food they've been condemned for eating. ... The status of the food rose but not the people. They just had less to eat."
See, food can become a means of perpetuating prejudice. When foods rise up the ladder  -  even if only for a night, when they find themselves on the dining room table of a wealthy suburbanite throwing a "white trash potluck"  -  but the people stay down...you begin to see a whole group of people  -  a group of people who are already struggling  -  as lesser. As...embarrassing and gross and weird and...as trash.
      "Polite society regards me as stupid, lazy, ignorant, violent and untrustworthy. 
      I am trash because of where I'm from. 
      I am trash because of where I shop. 
      I am trash because of what I eat. 
      But human beings are not trash."

Connection to Next Episode
When we think of trash food, we think of food that's really...unhealthy. I mean, part of what makes foods so cheap is because of how processed they are. 
But what shapes our idea of what "healthy" means? Where do we get our concepts of calories and how much fat and sodium we should have in a day? 
We might have...some...idea? Y'know...scientists and nutritionists and teachers and federal guidelines and everything...
But what if I told you that all of that...is based on lies force-fed to us by food companies?
Stick around for the next episode, where we'll look into the actual, real conspiracy behind the foods we eat.
Bye folks!

End Crawl
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! This one is a little different from my Lovecraft series, but I'm trying something new, so let me know what you think in the comments below. Also, feel free to go follow me on Twitter - @Zoe underscore TheBee where I do a lot of angry tweeting. And if you want to support me so I can keep making these videos on an adjunct salary, check out my Patreon, linked in the description.
I also want to just give a huge thank you to everyone who has liked and commented and subscribed  -  the feedback has been overwhelmingly positive, and it really does mean...a lot. More than I can put into words, and I'm an English teacher, so that it quite the feat.
But seriously, thank you all so much for the kind words of support, you are all absolutely amazing, and I'm excited to keep doing what I'm doing and making stuff that yall like!






How the Food Industry Lies to You
Disclaimer and TW
Hi folks! Before we jump into the video, I want to give a quick disclaimer: in this video I'm going to talk a lot about food and health and eating and body composition. If discussing these things is upsetting to you, then you might want to skip this video. 
Also, I am not a dietician or a doctor or a scientist or any kind of health authority. This video is not meant to be advice on what to eat. If you want advice on that, go to your doctor, ask them. 
Alright...with that out of the way, let's get started.

Intro
Thanksgiving is just around the corner. For my non-American audience, Thanksgiving falls on the fourth Thursday in November, and it's when we celebrate the pilgrims escaping tyranny in England, coming to the New World, breaking bread with the Native Americans who lived here, and then everyone lived happily ever after, Amen.
While the original meaning and history of Thanksgiving is...rough...the holiday is still the centerpiece of the whole month. We spend the entire month thinking about food, planning what we're going to make, deciding how big of a turkey we need to get. 
We have a whole holiday focused on eating.
Now, in the midst of an obesity crisis, eating - or, more specifically, what we eat - is...complicated.
The food we eat has a direct impact on our health. It can make us more susceptible to diseases, it can boost our immune systems, it can make us gain weight or make us lose weight. With that in mind, most of us try to eat healthy foods (to varying levels of success).
What we consider to be "healthy" is, itself, a challenging question. It seems like we're constantly bombarded by a barrage of conflicting information about which foods we should and should not eat.
Remember when fat was evil? Fast forward to today, where the keto diet - a diet centered around healthy fats - is all the rage.
How are we supposed to know what the truth is when it comes to healthy eating?
Well, what if I told you that there is one, single reason for all this confusion. And that one reason is a shadowy cabal of wealthy elites who pay off the government so that food companies can make unsubstantiated claims about the health of their products, all in the name of profit?
...you'd probably say that's far-fetched and a little crazy and conspiratorial - which it is, a little bit - but this is one conspiracy theory that actually happens to be true.

The Timeline
Before we can get into the nefarious details, we first need to understand how we got here. 
So, almost a hundred years ago, the U.S. was facing food shortages and mass hunger. The Great Depression caused economic turmoil that meant people couldn't always afford food. And, when they could afford food, they often couldn't afford good food. People were hungry, they had nutrient deficiencies...they needed to eat more.
So, the government enlisted the help of farmers and scientists to figure out what people needed to eat to be healthy and how to get those foods to more people.
It was a win-win situation, really. Well...a win-win-win. The food industry got subsidies and was able to sell more food and make more money; the people got to eat; and the government got to keep its people alive. 
This deal was especially lucrative for the food industries. After all, the entire purpose of companies is to make money. That's literally their one goal. And they got to make money. Lots of money. They made money hand-over-fist thanks to the government's eat more directive.
Fast forward a few decades, though, and we were still telling people to "eat more" up through the 1950s and 60s. And, thanks to the food rationing during World War II and the associated guidelines that emphasized eating diets rich in fats, people were actually starting to eat too much,  - or at least too much of the wrong stuff - and starting to suffer the consequences.
The U.S. now had a problem on their hands: "Eat more" had been a win-win-win. Everyone benefitted. But now people were eating too much and nutrition scientists had the daunting task of convincing the government to change their federal health guideline messaging from "eat more" to "eat less."
This message was...not very well-received.
See, when the government was pushing their "eat more" message, the agriculture industry loved it. And because the "eat more" message was such an important one, the federal government loved it too. It was a match made in heaven. The food industry and the federal government got in bed together. They worked extremely closely, creating ties between congress (the lawmaking process) and the food industry that are still around today.
So, when the messaging changed to "eat less," the food industry felt betrayed. How could the government stab them in the back like that? Didn't they know how "eat less" would hurt their businesses?
There were riots. Well, not really "riots," but there was a lot of whining and complaining on the part of the food industry. They were upset and needed to get the politicians back on their side. They needed to keep making money.
To do this, food companies enlisted the help of PACs and lobbyists.
Now, I'm not going to get into the details here, but basically, PACs (or Political Action Committees) are organizations whose sole purpose is to be able to legally donate tons of money to politicians, and lobbyists are people who 
      "[attempt] to influence government policy or action...[by] promoting the views of special interest groups [and] attempting to influence government laws, rules, or policies that might affect those groups. ...Food lobbyists, therefore, are people who ask government officials to make rules or laws that will benefit their clients' companies, whether or not they benefit anyone else" (95).
Essentially, lobbyists are the people who wine-and-dine politicians and know their favorite kind of cigar and give them presents for all their kids' birthdays. They're the shady creeps who have an unprecedented amount of control over the decisions our representatives make.
Anyway, the food companies had these PACs and lobbyists whose job it was to persuade government officials to ignore the "eat less" advice, and continue promoting "eat more."
Remember, food companies want to make money. So, even if it isn't necessarily in the public interest to "eat more," the food companies need people to eat more so they can keep making money.
Now, even though the scientists were pretty much in consensus that people needed to stop "eating more," it's not like the politicians were all gung-ho about the new messaging, either. In fact, many of them were downright hostile toward it. 
"Why?" you might ask? I mean, if all these scientists had determined what the public needed to be healthy, why wouldn't the government - the body representing the public - want to listen? Why would they fight this?
Well...for the same exact reason the food companies were fighting it. See, "lobbyists and government officials are not always distinct populations." There are many politicians who used to work in food industries and then moved to politics, and there are many food industry execs who used to be politicians:
      "Today's public servant is tomorrow's lobbyists, and vice versa. The revolving-door transformation of government officials into lobbyists and of lobbyists into government officials is not a new phenomenon, [either]. ... [For example,] the chief USDA negotiator who arranged for private companies to sell grain to the Societ Union in 1972 resigned to work for the very company that gained the most from the transaction" (100).
In other words, many politicians didn't want to listen to the scientists because they had a stake - literally, they were stakeholders - in the "eat more" guidelines that helped their business ties prosper.
Anyway, we had these food industry PACs donating money to politicians, lobbyists wining and dining politicians, politicians with direct ties to the food industry...and a body of scientists and the public who just wanted all of us to be healthy, even though that meant we have to "eat less." We had all these groups intertwining and fighting and arguing, and after a series of hearings to discuss the future of federal health guidelines...we had a winner...
Unsurprisingly...the money won. The politicians caved to industry pressure. 
It wasn't a total win on the part of the food industry, though. Industry people realized that they couldn't continue to just ignore all the scientific evidence: it was pretty clear that the science supported advice to eat less meat and less dairy and just...less in general. So, in the face of this indisputable science, what could the industry do?
They could bullshit. The compromise between money and health was vague language.
They couldn't just ignore the scientific advice, but what they could do was make the language of that advice ambiguous. They could make the wording weak and wishy-washy. 
With the influence of their PACs and lobbyists, the food industry folks convinced the politicians to change the wording of their health guidelines. They legally had to suggest the idea of "eating less," but they didn't want to outright say that people should "eat less."
So what they did was change "eat less of the bad thing" to the kinder - if less accurate - "eat more of the least bad type of the bad thing." Instead of saying you should "eat less meat" they suggested you "choose lean meats." Instead of saying you should "eat less dairy," or "eat less salt" they suggested you "limit saturated fat intake" or "reduce sodium consumption."
What you will notice about this wording is that "choose" is a positive word, and it's associated with a food - "meat." Whereas "limit" is a negative word, and it's associated with nutrients - "saturated fat," "sodium." This is very much a conscious choice:
      "[The] `eat more' guidelines are the only ones that refer to foods - grains, vegetables, and fruits. The `eat less' guidelines, in contrast, talk about nutrients or food chemicals (fat, cholesterol, sugar, salt, alcohol) - not their food source...They refer to fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol, but not to the most important food sources of fats - meats, dairy, eggs, and fried and processed foods. They refer to salt and sugar, not to pretzels or soft drinks." (76-77).
The language was the loophole.
We can even see an example of this in the transcript of one of the health guideline hearings, where Senator Bob Dole compromised with the president of the National Cattleman's Association on the wording of the recommendation to "decrease consumption of meat"
      "`I wonder if you could amend [it] and say `increase consumption of lean meat'? Would that taste better to you?' [Dole asked. Mr. Finney replied,] `Decrease is a bad word, Senator.'" (41)
Don't eat less meat. Eat more lean meat. 
Now, obviously this wasn't an outright win for science. But scientists knew that this was the best they were going to get - at least for now. So, the scientists were placated, the industry folks were happy, and the politicians were happy because the industry folks were happy (and would continue to fund their campaigns).
What this conflict illuminated, though, was that nutrition science wasn't going away anytime soon. And the industry folks recognized this. And they had to figure out what to do about it. Sooner or later, they were going to have to reckon with the indisputable scientific facts that their foods were...maybe not good for people?
Enter the age of co-opting science.
The food industry realized that if they couldn't ignore nutrition scientists, they could at least use them. And use them they did. Companies and trade associations hired scientists, funded research, wrote grants, and donated to universities - all in the name of science. 
"Do some experiments to see if our product reduces heart disease, will you?" they asked.
"Test this new strain of fruit we want to grow, and tell us how nutritious it is." 
Now, scientists are not usually very well-funded, so they're always looking for people who will pay for their work. They often rely on these kind of corporate sponsorships and industry grants. Also, being funded by a company to do research on that company's products is not inherently ethically problematic.
However...food industry folks weren't doing this out of the kindness of their hearts, or out of a genuine, objective interest in nutrition science.
      "Co-opting experts...is an explicit corporate strategy. A guide to such strategies explains that this particular tactic `is most effectively done by identifying the leading experts...[and] giving them research grants and the like. This activity requires a modicum of finesse; it must not be too blatant, for the experts themselves must not recognize that they have lost their objectivity and freedom of action.'" (111).
Companies literally admit to only hiring scientists so they can use the results to market their products. This isn't to say that scientists knowingly, consciously skew their research in favor of the people funding them. This does happen, but it more often happens unconsciously. Unconscious bias is a thing, and it happens to scientists, just like the rest of us. Even if it's uncommon, it is a thing that happens, and it's something we need to be aware of.
What's more common, though, is that scientists will do good, objective science and come out with results that are lukewarm at best (like "our results indicate there may be a link between eating X-Brand Almonds and a lower likelihood of getting heart disease, but more testing is required to determine the exact nature of this link"). Then the company that hired them will twist those results and use them in their marketing ("X-Brand Almonds: Definitely A Heart Healthy Snack!").
Between the ambiguous language of health guidelines and the confusing and skewed research, nutrition has become a complicated subject. Food industry folks know this. They know that it can be hard to tell what exactly is a healthy or unhealthy food (after all - even potato chips are made of vegetables and have vitamins and minerals). And they take advantage of this confusion:
      If people are confused about nutrition, they will be more likely to accept such claims at face value. It is in the interest of food companies to have people believe that there is no such thing as a "good" food (except when it is theirs); that there is no such thing as a "bad" food (especially not theirs); that all foods (especially theirs) can be incorporated into healthful diets;...[and] that no advice to restrict intake of their particular product is appropriate" (21).
This is the reason why it seems like there's a new scientific study touting the positive health effects of some new "super-food" every couple months. Because there is. Because companies keep paying scientists to do more and more research and flood the market. It's confusing because it is designed to be. When we're overwhelmed with information, when scientists lose their credibility (for seemingly contradicting themselves so often), when we don't know who to trust or what to believe...we can more easily be taken advantage of.
And...this is where we're at today. Now, there have been way more big disputes between scientists, the government, and food companies, that I haven't talked about. If you want to check those out, I highly recommend reading the main book I'm using during this episode, Food Politics: How the Food Industry Influences Nutrition and Health, by Marion Nestle. She's a food scientist who actually worked as an advisor to the federal government when they were making and revising these health guidelines, so she's seen first-hand the corruption in the system.
Anyway, generally speaking, this is how we got here, and this is where we are right now. Health experts say that we need to eat less, but companies want us to eat more so that they can keep selling their products. Scientists and politicians are in the pocket of the food industries, so that they can ensure the federal health guidelines don't stray too far in the "eat less" direction.
And we - the actual people who live and shop and eat in this country - are left with a confusing mess, and regardless of how well we try to eat and how smart we try to be about our food choices, our obesity and disease rates are still rising.
Something...is wrong.

The Problem
So...what is actually the root of this problem? We have this tangled web of relationships and money and influence, but what is the cause? What is the string that, if pulled, will unravel the whole mess?
Um...capitalism.
Now before you angry-type your hate comment about how I'm some unAmerican commie, let me explain.
At the beginning, I mentioned that companies' one goal is to make money. They produce things, they influence our health and wellbeing, but at the end of the day, their goal is to make money.
This doesn't mean that food companies will just feed us sawdust and garbage; they do care about nutrition...as long as it has a positive effect on their sales: "Food companies are not health or social service agencies, and nutrition becomes a factor in corporate thinking only when it can help sell food" (2).
If you want an example of this, just look at how many different kinds of supposedly-healthy products there are on the shelves. Do we want the cookies with "no sugar added", or the ones "made with real sugar"? Or the organic ones? Or the ones that have been "fortified" with 8 different vitamins and minerals? Or the ones that say they're a "good source of fiber"?
Food companies know that all of these messages sound good, and that we will usually accept those claims at face value. But, if we actually looked at the nutritional value of those products, we'd realize that a lot of those supposedly healthy foods are actually full of crap:
      "...more than one-fourth [of new products created in a year] are `nutritionally enhanced' so that they can be marketed as low in fat, cholesterol, salt, or sugar or as higher in fiber, calcium, or vitamins. Some such products, among them no-fat cookies, vitamin-enriched cereals, and calcium-fortified juice drinks, contain so much sugar that they belong at the top of the [Food] Pyramid. Developing such foods has only one purpose: to attract sales" (25).
Now, you might argue that the solution to this is for people to just read the labels more closely, but a) most health claims are harder to dispute than that, and b) the only reason we have labels in the first place is because doctors and scientists and the public fought for them. 
Companies make and market and sell products only to make money. They do not actually care about your health. They care about making money; if they can do that by making you think their foods are healthy, then they'll do that. But they have no obligation to make their foods as healthy as their claims suggest they are. They have no obligation to make ethical decisions if they're not legally required to. They will only make ethical decisions as long as it makes them money.
      "Companies are in business to make money; that is their job. For stockholders, it is irresponsible - and illegal - for companies to make decisions that will not lead to increased profits. If companies offer foods of minimal nutritional value and people buy them, companies will continue to make and market them. If fat, sugar, and salt help to sell products, companies will market top-of-the-Pyramid products... If `nutrition' - added vitamins, reduced fat - helps to sell products, the companies will use nutrition as a marketing tool...whether or not the products [are actually healthy]" (362).
Clearly, there is a discrepancy between the goals of companies and the goals of people who care about our health. And it's literally killing us.

A Solution?
So what do we do about this? How do we solve this problem?
Well...outside of just tearing down the system and starting from scratch..........
One go-to answer is to just tax the hell out of the problematic industries, or to otherwise make it monetarily unfavorable to stay in business. However, it's not like the meat and dairy industries are independent entities that are just...like...evil, supervillain lairs that you can just destroy without any repercussions and then get a gold medal from the President calling you a hero.
No, these businesses are all interconnected, and, even worse, they're all good for our economy. Think about how many people are employed to work in these industries. Just getting rid of them - even if it would be the best thing for our health - isn't a feasible choice. We can't make these kinds of big changes because it affects everything:
      "Ethical or not, a message to eat less meat, dairy, and processed foods is not going to be popular among the producers of such foods....The message will not be popular with cattle ranchers, meat packers, dairy producers, or milk bottlers; oil seed growers, processors, or transporters; grain producers...; makers of soft drinks, candy bars, and snack foods; owners of fast-food outlets and franchise restaurants; media corporations and advertising agencies; manufacturers and marketers of television sets and computers (where advertising takes place).... The range of economic sectors that would be affected if people changed their diets [is immense]."
The shadowy cabal of industry and government officials who are pulling the strings on our health are all aware of this. They know that our economy is a delicate, tangled mess. It's a complex system - a living organism, and so if any one industry dies, it can and will have a ripple effect of consequences.
The "powers that be" want to keep our system intact, even though it is killing people:
      "USDA officials believe that really encouraging people to follow dietary guidelines would be so expensive and disruptive to the agricultural economy as to create impossible political barriers."
That is, the government, their scientists, and the corporations that fund the whole operation are working together to lie to the American public - at the cost of our health and our lives - because changing things would be too "expensive and disruptive."
That's a conspiracy if I've ever heard of one, folks.
So if changing things isn't going to work, what do these powerful groups suggest we do in the meantime? Well...
      "They propose a more politically expedient solution: the industry should work to improve the food supply through nutrient fortification and the development of functional foods with added nutritional value. Such proposals raise ethical dilemmas of their own. These foods are not necessarily `healthier,' and they encourage people to eat more, not less" (363-365).
They want to go with a cautious middle-ground approach. Except that it isn't actually better for us. So... clearly that's not a sustainable solution. Great.
Now, it's not all doom and gloom. There are some solutions that can work. For one, a lot of nutrition journals are making scientists be more up-front about who is funding their research. This way data is more transparent and can be scrutinized for bias more easily.
As for us little people, we can elect politicians who support lobbying reform. We can elect politicians who don't have food industry ties. 
We can also vote with our wallets (or vote with our forks, as Marion Nestle phrases it). When possible, buy whole, unprocessed, mostly plant-based foods. The foods that are good for us, and that scientists have known are good for us for...ever, really. Foods that aren't argued about because the science is settled.
Now...I know this isn't possible for everyone. I mean, hell, my last video was about white trash food and why poor folks don't eat "healthy" foods (link in the description).
This is a good step if you can take it, but it's not a universal solution.
Okay, so what about education? Can we just teach everyone about all the stuff the food industry is doing to take advantage of them, and how to make healthier choices with their eating?
Well, we do kind of do this already. Everything we've done educationally is pretty milque-toast, though. We had the Food Pyramid and MyPlate and Michelle Obama's healthy eating initiatives, and...we're still having problems. Part of this is because, while education is important, it doesn't do a great job of fundamentally changing systems:
      "Educational approaches... [are] relatively uncontroversial because they are phrased in euphemisms, can be easily countered by advertising, and have little impact on food choice. Changing the food environment is another matter" (393).
Okay, so how do we "change the food environment"?
...I don't know.
Outside of tearing it all down and starting over......................
I don't know what the solution is. I don't know how to make companies care more about people than about money. I don't know how to keep money out of politics. I don't know how to help people be healthy when "healthy" is almost meaningless at this point and when income inequality and food deserts mean that a substantial number of people just can't eat "healthy" with the way our system is currently set up. I don't know how to change the fact that we have industries that are too big to fail but too dangerous to keep around.
Voting - with our ballots and with our forks - can change things, but I don't know how much it can change the fundamental principles underlying this whole mess. 
I wish there were some answer I could give, but I don't have one. Maybe... Listen to scientists? Listen to experts? Listen to people who don't have any monetary ties to the industry? 
Remove the money and you remove the problem.
Just think about how healthy we could be if we pruned away all the industry-diseased branches, if we removed our system from the equation and - for once - didn't make our decision based on what's best for corporations. What if our government actually was of the people, by the people, and for the people? 
Until that happens...stay safe, folks.

End Crawl
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! I know this was a long one, but there was a lot to cover and it was hard to decide what to cut out - and, actually there was a lot more that I wanted to talk about, but...maybe some other time?
Anyway, thank you for watching and for all the love on my other videos. I really do appreciate all of you so, so, so much. 
If you want more of me, you can go follow me on Twitter: @ Zoe underscore The Bee, and if you want to help me make more of these videos, you can join me on Patreon - link in the description. 
This one was a little depressing, I think, so...I'm going to end this video with a clip of puppies as a sort of palate cleanser.
Okay...enjoy folks - have a good holiday weekend, stay safe, and I'll see yall again soon, I hope.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Script: H.P Lovecraft in 3 Parts 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Unknown 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Disclaimer 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Welcome! In this video, we are going to talk about fear, the uncanny valley, aliens, body horror,  and...just generally creepy stuff. If this is something that makes you uncomfortable, then you  might want to skip this video. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you're comfortable engaging with this conversation, then welcome! 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I also want to list a quick spoiler warning for the following stories: 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- "The Shadow Over Innsmouth" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- "The Whisperer in Darkness" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- And "The Statement of Randolph Carter." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
With that out of the way, let's get started... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Background 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear, and the oldest and strongest kind of fear  is fear of the unknown." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Howard Philips Lovecraft is known for composing some of the darkest, most chilling science  fiction and fantasy stories ever written. His works have been retold and added onto and have  inspired countless other writers of horror. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But if there are so many other horror stories to tell, why have we held on so long to the works of  a demonstrably terrible man? What makes the Cthulhu mythos such a deep-set and widespread  part of the cultural consciousness?  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The fiction of H.P. Lovecraft is scary. But so is a lot of stuff. That's the entire point of  Halloween. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So what is it, exactly, that sets Lovecraft's work apart? What makes the stories of H.P. Lovecraft  so scary?  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, most people would say it's the "fear of the unknown"  -  an idea that Lovecraft himself  agreed with. The unknown, he said, is the greatest source of our greatest emotion. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But the phrase "fear of the unknown" is actually a little misleading. See, it's not the unknown that's so scary. Well, it isn't just the unknown. It's "fear of the unknown, within the known" It is  the fear of the unfamiliar within the familiar. It's the mismatch between reality and memory,  between what you're experiencing now and what you've experienced in the past. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In other words, it's the uncanny.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What is the Uncanny? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The uncanny is an almost unidentifiable sense of dread and uncertainty. It's the feeling that  something is off, but you can't quite put your finger on it. It's the inability to tell whether  something is familiar or unfamiliar. Do I recognize this thing? Do I know if it's a threat? Do I  know anything about it? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, why does this happen? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, our brains are lazy. They conserve energy as much as possible. Being presented with new  information can be a pretty energy-hungry process, though. Because of this, our brains try to find  familiarity within everything we see. That's why we see faces in objects and why we see patterns  everywhere. We want new things to relate as much as possible to things we already know about,  because if they are like things we already know about, we know what to expect from them. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
To make this easier on ourselves, we tend to, subconsciously, make a lot of assumptions. We see  something that looks like an apple, we assume it's an apple. We know what apples are, we have  had experiences with apples, we know what to expect from apples, we know what they look,  feel, and taste like. Our brain has a box full of information about apples, so if we come across  something new, but that fits within the category of "apple," we already have a ton of information  about it, without having to take any risks or learn anything new. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, we learn to like the familiar. The known. The easier it is to categorize our perceptions and  experiences, the less stress we put on our brains, the fewer negative emotions we feel, and the  more comfortable we are. The more easily things fit into our brain-boxes, the happier we are. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So what does this mean for the uncanny?  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, the uncanny occurs when something rides the line between categories. When we can't  decide between two boxes, or when we try to fit something into two opposing, mutually  exclusive categories. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
That...is where the real fear comes in. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uncanny Valley and Liminal Spaces 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Most of us are familiar with the uncanny through the idea of the "uncanny valley." The uncanny  valley describes how comfortable we are with objects the closer they resemble people. SHOW  GRAPH HERE. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are comfortable with things that are definitely inhuman and things that are definitely human,  but our comfort levels plummet when something is...just in-between the two. This dip is known  as the "uncanny valley." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
When an object blurs the line between the human and the un-human, we can't decide which box  it should go in. And our brains are...not very happy about that.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is another, similar concept of the uncanny, though. That of "liminal spaces." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
When we're presented with a "liminal space," we are shown something familiar in an unfamiliar  setting  -  like a playground (familiar thing) at night (unfamiliar setting), or an abandoned  (unfamiliar setting) mall (familiar thing). We have boxes we can place those familiar things into   -  different "settings" they can fit comfortably and normally within. But if we are presented with  those familiar things in an unfamiliar setting, we are unprepared. We don't have a box for that.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So what actually makes this scary? Why does the uncanny  -  this combination of "known and  unknown,"  -  freak us out so much? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Why is the Uncanny Scary? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
When our brains are comfortable with a thing  -  and especially when we have positive  associations with that thing  -  we let our guard down. We see something that looks like an apple,  and based on what we know about apples  -  we know we don't have to worry about apples. It  wouldn't even cross our mind to be afraid of an apple. We trust the apple. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The real fear comes when the familiar, known thing betrays that trust. When the apple  -  the  thing we were comfortable with  -  becomes unfamiliar, our brains go into panic mode.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What's even worse is when that betrayal of trust doesn't have a resolution. When, not only does  the object not fit into the category we thought it did, but it doesn't fit within any known category.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Both liminal spaces and the uncanny valley do this to us. They present us with something that is  almost normal  -  our brains want to think the thing we're looking at is normal. But then, we  realize it's...not normal. We realize it's...something else entirely. Something new. Unknown.  And that's terrifying. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
When we see something uncanny, we are given something almost known. We are given  something that appears to fit in one box, but then reveals that it never fit in that box to begin  with, leaving us without a catalog of information about it. Leaving us with nothing. Nothing but  our imaginations.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If the apple could do that, what else could it do? What other unknown qualities could it have? And the answer...could be anything. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uncanny in Lovecraft 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So where does this fit within the writing of H.P. Lovecraft? How is the uncanny used in his  stories to evoke uncertainty and fear and dread? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well...it's everywhere. Almost all of the "scares" in these stories...are in the uncanny.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
You know something is going to go wrong. It is a horror story, after all. It's just...you are never  certain...what...exactly is going to go wrong. The pin has to drop, the dominoes have to  fall...but what pushes them? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The monsters in these stories are certainly uncanny. And I don't just mean the almost-natural beasts of gargantuan size and mind-melting abilities, like Cthulhu or the Shoggoths.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
No, I mean the monsters you never see. The monsters that exist only in shadows, half-visible and  barely-heard. The monsters you can only imagine. The monsters that are...really...unknown. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In "The Shadow Over Innsmouth," our main character visits the sleepy, old fishing town as a  secondary stop on his way elsewhere. He's told stories about this town, stories of people going  missing, of disease and misfortune striking the townsfolk, and of mysterious cults who worship  dark aquatic beings.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But he goes to Innsmouth anyway. And when he gets there, he finds that all those stories are  true. The townsfolk are ugly, odd people. Their heads and bodies are misshapen, and they  shamble when they walk, often staring into a vague middle distance with cloudy eyes. They look   -  and act  -  almost human. But not quite.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The most unnerving  -  uncanny  -  sight for our protagonist, though, occurs when he passes a  church near the center of town. Here, he sees the pastor of the church, briefly, out of the corner  of his eye: 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The door of the church basement was open, revealing a rectangle of blackness inside.  And as I looked, a certain object crossed or seemed to cross that dark rectangle; burning  into my brain a momentary conception of nightmare which was all the more maddening  because analysis could not shew a single nightmarish quality in it. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
It was a living object...and had I been in a steadier mood I would have found nothing  whatever of terror in it. Clearly, as I realised a moment later, it was the pastor; clad in  some peculiar vestments... The thing which had probably caught my first subconscious  glance and supplied the touch of bizarre horror was the tall tiara he wore...This, acting on  my imagination, had supplied namelessly sinister qualities to the indeterminate face and  robed, shambling form beneath it. There was not, I soon decided, any reason why I  should have felt that shuddering touch of evil pseudo-memory. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is a single, but powerful, example of the terror of the uncanny. The terror of the  combination of familiar and unfamiliar, known and unknown. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pastors and churches are a familiar sight, especially in 1920s New England. So, too, was our  narrator aware of the odd tiara the pastor was wearing, since he had seen a similar one just the  day before in a museum. The combination of these things  -  seeing a pastor wearing vestments  associated with a dark and mysterious cult, seeing a cult's relic outside of a museum (and in a  church no less)  -  that...is disconcerting. It catches you off-guard, makes you do a double take.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
That surprise  -  or feeling of betrayal, even  -  of the subversion of your expectations is made all  the worse when you're unable to clarify your thoughts, to reanalyze the information and realize,  "Oh, yeah, okay, so it wasn't what I thought, but now I do know what's going on." You see, not  only was there a combination of known and unknown when our protagonist caught the glimpse  of the odd cult pastor, but he was never actually able to resolve that uneasiness. The church was  dark, the pastor simply walked in front of the doorway and then was gone. There was nothing to  see, no way to confirm or debunk what the protagonist thought he had seen.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If seeing something uncanny makes you ask the question "If it isn't what I thought it was, then  what is it and what could it do?" then darkness, obfuscation, and secrecy makes it impossible to  find the answer. There is no more information, there is nothing else to go on, there is just the  question. And that is what makes these stories so frightening. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What makes the uncanny even more terrifying is when you are given just enough information  -  not enough to really know what something is, but enough to know what it could do. When you  never see the monster, but you see what it leaves in its wake. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In "The Whisperer in Darkness," our protagonist, Albert Wilmarth, a professor of literature, is  researching tales of monstrous, alien, almost-human creatures that lived, hidden, in the hills of  Vermont. As part of his research, he corresponds with Henry Akeley, an amateur studier of  folklore who has been gathering information about the alien creatures. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are told, secondhand  -  our information filtered first through Akeley, and then through  Wilmarth  -  all about these alien creatures.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are told how they communicate in guttural, buzzing speech, speech far from human,  yet...speaking in perfect, precise, scholarly English. We are told how these creatures sometimes  leave footprints in the muddy Vermont earth, but whose prints always seem to mysteriously  vanish before they can be photographed or shown to an authority. How they meet in cult-like  gatherings, along with others  -  humans, who are spies for the creatures, gathering information  and acting as liaisons between the aliens and the inhabitants of the sleepy Vermont town. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are told how you can hear them buzzing around your house at night, hear them clawing at  your window, how you know they are watching you at all times, but...you're never able to see  them. Not clearly, not in the light, not fully. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
They  -  the unknown  -  are infiltrating our known reality. Our town, our home, even...our friends  and family. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
You see...by the end of the story, our protagonist Wilmarth has been asked to visit by Akeley.  (Mind you, this was after Akeley was, supposedly, attacked by the alien creatures, then went  silent for a while. So...you be the judge of that.). 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wilmarth takes a train and, eventually, a taxi, up from Arkham, Mass. to Townshend, Vermont.  He makes his way to Akeley's home, bringing all of the information he's collected on the  creatures, so he and Akeley can pore over it together.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, upon reaching the house, he finds the farmland eerily quiet. No livestock, no dogs, no sounds, even, from birds. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wilmarth also finds Akeley very ill due  -  Akeley says  -  to a bout of asthma attacks. Akeley is so  ill, in fact, that he is bundled up from head to toe. He has a "strained, rigid, immobile expression  and unwinking glassy stare," along with "limp, lifeless...lean hands rest[ing] in his lap." When  he speaks, he speaks in a hoarse, hacking whisper, and his lips barely move, and he emits a  strange, foul odor. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Akeley even offers Wilmarth some coffee, but the smell is acrid, burnt...wrong. He politely  declines the drink.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our protagonist senses that something is wrong, but he can't quite place his finger on it. He  knows it's too quiet, he knows his sick host is acting odd, he knows there was something off  about the food and drink, but there is nothing more than a feeling. Nothing more  than...something isn't right. Nothing more than...something is here which doesn't belong. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
That is, until the night of his escape from the farmhouse. You see, Akeley tells Wilmarth several  things about the alien creatures  -  who, he says, did not mean to harm him, and simply wanted to  share their vast stores of knowledge with humanity. He says the alien creatures can travel  through space, and that they have the technology to transfigure humans into forms that are able  to travel alongside the creatures  -  a form that is, essentially, a brain in a jar. Akeley tells  Wilmarth that, the next day, the alien creatures would prepare the two men for interstellar travel,  and then they, Akeley and Wilmarth, would be privy to the secrets of the universe. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wilmarth goes to bed that night, understandably overwhelmed with this information. After  overhearing a frightening conversation during the night, Wilmarth plans his escape. He knows he  must get out of the house: "[S]omething in that fragmentary discourse had chilled me  immeasurably," he says, "raised the most grotesque and horrible doubts, and made me wish  fervently that I might wake up and prove everything a dream. I think my subconscious mind  must have caught something which my consciousness has not yet recognised." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, he leaves. He grabs his coat and his hat. Silently opens the bedroom door. Creeps down the  hallway, down the steps. Being a thoughtful man, even through his fear, he tries to find Akeley,  hoping to wake him and flee the place together. Akeley is not in downstairs bedroom, however,  where Wilmarth was expecting to find him. So, he searches the study, the room where he and  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Akeley had sat and talked, the room where Akeley had revealed to him the secrets of the aliens. Flashlight in hand, he searches. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"From the table I turned my flashlight to the corner where I thought Akeley was, but  found to my perplexity that the great easy-chair was empty of any human occupant asleep  or awake. From the seat to the floor there trailed voluminously the familiar old dressing gown, and near it on the floor lay the yellow scarf and the huge foot-bandages I had  thought so odd. As I hesitated, striving to conjecture where Akeley might be, and why he  had so suddenly discarded his necessary sick-room garments, I observed that the queer  odour and sense of vibration were no longer in the room. What had been their cause? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Curiously it occurred to me that I had noticed them only in Akeley's vicinity. ... I  paused, letting the flashlight wander about the dark study and racking my brain for  explanations of the turn affairs had taken. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Would to heaven I had quietly left the place before allowing that light to rest again on  the vacant chair. As it turned out, I did not leave quietly; but with a muffled shriek... That shriek...[is the last sound] I ever heard in that morbidity-choked farmhouse beneath  the black-wooded crest of a haunted mountain -- that focus of trans-cosmic horror amidst  the lonely green hills and curse-muttering brooks of a spectral rustic land. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is a wonder that I did not drop flashlight, valise, and revolver in my wild scramble,  but somehow I failed to lose any of these. I actually managed to get out of that room and  that house without making any further noise, to drag myself and my belongings safely  into the old Ford in the shed, and to set that archaic vehicle in motion toward some  unknown point of safety in the black, moonless night. ... That is all. If my sanity is still  unshaken, I am lucky. ... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
As I have implied, I let my flashlight return to the vacant easy-chair after its circuit of  the room; then noticing for the first time the presence of certain objects in the seat, made  inconspicuous by the adjacent loose folds of the empty dressing-gown. These are the  objects, three in number, which the investigators did not find when they came later on. As  I said at the outset, there was nothing of actual visual horror about them. The trouble was  in what they led one to infer. Even now I have my moments of half-doubt -- moments in  which I half accept the scepticism of those who attribute my whole experience to dream  and nerves and delusion. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The three things were damnably clever constructions of their kind, and were  furnished with ingenious metallic clamps to attach them to organic developments of  which I dare not form any conjecture. I hope -- devoutly hope -- that they were the waxen  products of a master artist, despite what my inmost fears tell me. Great God! That  whisperer in darkness with its morbid odour and vibrations! Sorcerer, emissary,  changeling, outsider . . . that hideous repressed buzzing . . . and all the time in that fresh,  shiny cylinder on the shelf . . . poor devil . . . "prodigious surgical, biological, chemical,  and mechanical skill". . . 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For the things in the chair, perfect to the last, subtle detail of microscopic  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
resemblance -- or identity -- were the face and hands of Henry Wentworth Akeley." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Everything he knew, or thought he knew, about Henry Akeley, about the town of Townshend  and the alien creatures who inhabited it...suddenly became unknown. Into that sleepy farmhouse,  an old and comfortable sort of place, was inserted the most horrific kind of body horror.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If Akeley wasn't Akeley, what else here isn't what it seems? What else is wrong and broken and  alien and unknown? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
When you don't actually know what you thought you knew, you suddenly question...everything.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I want to leave you with one final example of the uncanny. A story whose monster is never seen.  A story whose protagonist goes mad anyway. A story whose ending...well...you'll see. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In "The Statement of Randolph Carter," the titular man stands trial for the death of his friend Harley Warren. The story is comprised of Randolph's recounting of the events that led to his  friend's death.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
You see, Harley is dead. And we are told this at the outset, just 5 sentences into the story. We just don't know exactly how he met that fate. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In any other horror story, we wouldn't know of his death until the end. It would be the climax. It  would be the moment in the slasher film where the Big Bad comes in, axe swinging, and hacks  through the back of the Best Friend(TM). 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But that's not what happens in "The Statement of Randolph Carter." No, instead, we're told that our main character hopes his friend "is in peaceful oblivion" after the "horrors" of that "awful  night."  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Throughout the tale, we are told of Harley's deep, dark research into deep, dark things. We're  told of how he asked our protagonist Randolph to come with him to explore an ancient cemetery  full of unknown things. We're told only vagaries of what his research was about, and, like  Randolph, our minds are left to fill in the blanks. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our protagonist is left at the surface as Harley ventures down into a catacomb, descending stairs  set in the ground that lead deep into the earth, taking with him only a communication device, a  light, and his ancient book of secrets. Randolph  -  and we, the reader  -  can only imagine what  Harley sees as he reaches the unknown, unknowable place. Even Harley struggles to capture in  words the things he sees. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
All we know is that it is something terrible and monstrous. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
It isn't until the end of the story that we're told what actually happened on that night. And even  then, we never know what kind of fate met Harley Warren. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
All we are told is that, eventually, Harley saw something awful...grotesque...monstrous, and  told Randolph to run. To close up the crypt behind him. To leave Harley to his fate. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But to what fate? What happened? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Randolph is never told. And so we...never know. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Frozen in fear, our protagonist stays on his end of the receiver, listening to the cries of his friend  as he tells Randolph, over and over, to leave. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And then...there's nothing. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
After that was silence. I know not how many interminable aeons I sat stupefied;  whispering, muttering, calling, screaming into that telephone. Over and over again  through those aeons I whispered and muttered, called, shouted, and screamed, "Warren!  Warren! Answer me -- are you there?"
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And then there came to me the crowning horror of all -- the unbelievable, unthinkable,  almost unmentionable thing. I have said that aeons seemed to elapse after Warren  shrieked forth his last despairing warning, and that only my own cries now broke the  hideous silence. But after a while there was a further clicking in the receiver, and I  strained my ears to listen. Again I called down, "Warren, are you there?", and in answer  heard the thing which has brought this cloud over my mind. I do not try, gentlemen, to  account for that thing -- that voice -- nor can I venture to describe it in detail, since the  first words took away my consciousness and created a mental blank which reaches to the  time of my awakening in the hospital. Shall I say that the voice was deep; hollow;  gelatinous; remote; unearthly; inhuman; disembodied? What shall I say? It was the end of  my experience, and is the end of my story. I heard it, and knew no more. Heard it as I sat  petrified in that unknown cemetery in the hollow, amidst the crumbling stones and the  falling tombs, the rank vegetation and the miasmal vapours. Heard it well up from the  innermost depths of that damnable open sepulchre as I watched amorphous,  necrophagous shadows dance beneath an accursed waning moon. And this is what it said: "YOU FOOL, WARREN IS DEAD!" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tie-Up and Connection to Next Episode 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The most frightening parts of Lovecraft's stories aren't the giant monsters or the sacrificial  death-cults. No, the frightening parts are the most mundane. The terror is in the quiet, misty hills  of Vermont. In the people who look or act...not quite right. In the glimpses of movement in the  shadows. In the startling realizations  -  the sudden awareness that something isn't as simple or  ordinary as you thought.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This sudden and uncomfortable new-ness is what is captured in "the unknown." When Lovecraft  said that "fear of the unknown" is the strongest kind of fear, he meant the uncanny. The  surprising. The weird things that make you do a double take. The realization that what you  thought you knew isn't actually what you're being faced with. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And he was right. It is frightening. Uncomfortable. Disconcerting. Terrifying. ...Scary as fuck.  Our brains don't like to be confronted with that kind of stuff.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So...why is it that so many of Lovecraft's stories place characters in these positions? And why  do so many of the characters knowingly and willingly seek out these uncanny experiences? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What happens when you are given the answer to the question of "What is reality? What is really  happening here? What is this thing?" What happens when you learn...the unlearnable? When  you know...the unknown? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well...you'll have to stick around to find out.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Madness 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Disclaimer 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Welcome! In this video, we are going to talk about mental health, mental illness, and the  institutionalization of people with mental illnesses, including violence by and to mentally ill  people and suicide. If this is something that makes you uncomfortable, then you might want to  skip this video. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you're a-okay engaging with this conversation, then welcome! 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I also want to list a quick spoiler warning for the following stories: 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- "The Rats in the Walls," 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- "The Whisperer in Darkness," 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- "The Hound" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- "The Colour Out of Space," 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- "At the Mountains of Madness," 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
With that out of the way, let's get started... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Background 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"If I am mad, it is mercy! May the gods pity the man who in his callousness can remain sane to  the hideous end! Come and be mad whilst he still calls with mercy!"  -  H.P. Lovecraft, "The  Temple" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Last time we spoke, we discussed how Lovecraft's writing evokes fear. We discussed the  Uncanny, how the unknown can cause uneasiness, and how this kind of fear leaves you with  more questions than answers.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you haven't watched it yet, stop this video, go down into the description, click the link, watch  that video, and then return here. Because today, we are going to talk about what happens when  you answer those unanswerable questions. When you are faced with terrifying things and  knowingly, consciously step toward them.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are going to talk about...madness. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What is Madness? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"Madness" is one of those words that can kind of mean a lot of different things. Sometimes it  means foolishness, sometimes it means enthusiasm, sometimes it means anger, sometimes it  means mental illness, sometimes it means being afflicted with rabies.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
It's not used very often today, and part of the reason for that is because it's fraught with a pretty  dicey past. During the time Lovecraft was writing, it was commonly used to refer to people who  were institutionalized for being mentally ill. The institutionalization of these people was...not  good. They were often treated poorly, even to the point of their deaths. Because of this "mad"  has become almost a slur in the mental health community. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Knowing this, I want to acknowledge that I am consciously using the words "mad" and  "madness." These are the words used by Lovecraft, and while he isn't, like, a good moral  standard or anything, it would be cumbersome and awkward to try to rephrase or reframe every instance of "madness" in his works. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
That being said, the concept of "madness" is still a complicated one. See, when it was more  widely used, it was an umbrella term. It covered a wide array of actual, discrete illnesses. You  could be labeled "mad" for having bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or any kind of psychosis. You  could even be "mad" for having epilepsy, a speech impediment, or being pregnant out of  wedlock. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If "madness" is all of these things, what is the uniting factor? I mean, what do all of these things  have in common?  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, during the time when people were being institutionalized for them, these behaviors,  illnesses, etc. were not understood, and sometimes even feared. Society in general, and even  psychiatrists specifically, didn't know a lot about certain disorders or conditions, like what  caused them, or how to effectively treat them. Because of this, these conditions were stigmatized  and feared. And, when people fear something, they do everything they can to remove it from  their observable reality. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, "madness," in Lovecraft's time, was kind of a catch-all for...things that society doesn't like. "Mad" people are those who were pushed to the margins, ignored, feared, whispered about.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Madnessin Lovecraft 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So what does this mean for Lovecraft? Well, madness shows up everywhere in his stories. Many  of his characters become "mad," or are surrounded by "mad" people. The infamous author of the  Necronomicon is referred to almost exclusively as "The Mad Arab" Abdul Alhazred. Madness  even finds its way into the title of one of Lovecraft's most well-regarded stories: "At the  Mountains of Madness." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Clearly, madness is an intriguing concept. So...let's get some intrigue.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
On the face of things, you'd think that Lovecraft would be using madness to stoke fear. Madness  is something very unknown, since only you are privy to what's going on in your own head. In  this way, madness is almost intimate. You don't know what it will be like until you experience it,  and when you experience it, no one else can truly understand it. Madness is...isolating. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For instance, in "Rats in the Walls," our protagonist travels to Europe to restore a decrepit old  castle that had been in his family for generations until it was abandoned under mysterious  circumstances. During the renovations, he learns more about his family's history and about the  secrets of the castle. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He also starts having odd dreams, and both he and his nine cats start to hear sounds in the walls.  Rats. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Eventually, he, a friend of his, and some archaeologists he hired travel down into the crypts  below the castle to get to the bottom (literally) of the mysterious sounds. What he finds...drives  him mad. Now, I won't spoil what, exactly, he comes across, but after his family's ancient  secrets are revealed, he blacks out, and wakes up in an asylum, told that he was found, crouched  over the body of his friend...eating him. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
See, madness is...weakness. It's not being able to process what you've seen or experienced, so  your mind...breaks. You see this time and time again in Lovecraft's stories.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In "The Whisperer in Darkness," the speaker says that "To visit Yuggoth would drive any weak  man mad -- yet I am going there," signaling that only mentally weak men would be driven mad. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Or, take "The Hound," where the speaker and his friend are wealthy and cultured grave-robbers  who steal from the dead for the thrill of it, and because they are particularly fond of mysterious  and occult items. However, this greed and decadence  -  this weakness of character  -  eventually  leads them to steal a cursed charm, which sends after them a demonic hound  -  or just paranoia,  we never know for sure. This paranoia  -  whether grounded in a real threat or entirely fabricated   -  drives our protagonist mad, and leads him, eventually, to suicide. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Or take "The Colour out of Space," where we see the effects of an otherworldly presence on the  minds of an entire town: 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"Anyone but a stolid farmer would have fainted or gone mad, but Ammi walked  conscious through that low doorway and locked the accursed secret behind him." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"They say the mental influences are very bad, too. Numbers went queer in the years after  Nahum's taking, and always they lacked the power to get away. Then the stronger minded folk all left the region, and only the foreigners tried to live in the crumbling old  homesteads." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
To avoid going mad, you have to be stoic, tough, "strong-minded." If you are weak (or a  foreigner...again, Lovecraft was human garbage), then your psyche isn't strong enough, and will  break. And you'll go mad. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, that's not the whole picture. You see, Lovecraft pairs madness with something else.  Something more positive. Something that any other writer would praise as a good trait for their  characters to have. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For Lovecraft, madness isn't random. It isn't something that just anyone experiences in his  stories. No, for Lovecraft, the people most susceptible to madness are  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
teachers...students...scientists...artists...explorers...scholars. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Because, in his stories, madness is linked to the imagination.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Let's return to "The Colour out of Space." In this story, we are getting a third-hand experience of  events that occurred decades ago, during which a meteor fell to earth in a small town outside of  Arkham. This meteor caused havoc on the town, but especially on the area in its direct vicinity  -  the Nahum family farm. Through the eyes of the protagonist, we are told this story by Ammi, the  neighbor of the Nahum family. So...this tale is going through quite the grapevine. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Anyway, the meteorite disintegrated soon after falling, but left a mark on the Nahum farm. At  first, it caused their crops to grow bigger and in more vibrant colors and caused the surrounding  wildlife to do the same.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Soon, though, it had more negative consequences. The large, colorful crops were revealed to be  rotten inside, and the now-monstrous-looking wild animals were aggressive. There was also  something in the air, and it caused the members of the Nahum family to change  -  to act...odd, to  become aggressive, to  -  eventually  -  begin to petrify, and then crumble into ash. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
When Ammi finds the family in this state  -  dead and decaying or alive and crazed  -  he  reacts...surprisingly...okay? He pushes past the awful reality of what he's seeing, and...is fine. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But why? What is it about Ammi that allowed him to confront some truly terrifying truths and  come out on the other side...not mad? Well, according to the story, "It was really lucky for  Ammi that he was not more imaginative. Even as things were, his mind was bent ever so  slightly; but had he been able to connect and reflect upon all the portents around him he must  inevitably have turned a total maniac." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ammi's lack of imagination is what saved him from going mad. Therefore, having a good  imagination makes you susceptible to madness. And there is ample evidence for this. Just look at  Lovecraft's main characters. Teachers, students, scientists, artists. All people who are  imaginative. All people who have positive traits, who are curious and intelligent. And...all  people who end up going mad, or worse. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
When Lovecraft was writing, madness was considered a curse. It was something that marked you  as an "other," as an outsider. Within these stories, though, madness isn't so one-note. It doesn't  necessarily mean you're weak. It could mean you're smart and curious and imaginative.  But...what does this mean? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The point of looking at madness within Lovecraft's writing is not to say that he was some kind of  progressive who fought to destigmatize mental illness, or anything. That just isn't the case.  Instead, I wanted to show that madness is...complicated.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Lovecraft's stories, madness comes to the "feeble-minded"  -  the weak people, the less  intelligent people, the non-white people. It is a curse, for them. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But it also comes to the cultured, the educated, the curious. For them...well, it's still a curse. But  what I'm getting at is that "going mad," isn't an indictment of your character. Unlike in the real  world of 1920's America, "madness" wasn't inherently an offense.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Lovecraft's stories, madness doesn't just happen to the bad people. While madness is still an  awful, terrifying experience, it could be indicative of your mental fortitude, of your intelligence,  of your willingness to ask questions and to seek out the answers.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Lovecraft's stories, madness is...almost...an honor, a prize. So the question isn't "Who is  cursed to go mad?" but instead... "Who...gets to go mad?"  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tie-Up and Connection to Next Episode 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What is it that leads people to become mad? In Lovecraft's stories, it's weakness of mind and  spirit. But it's also...imagination and curiosity. So, what makes the difference? Where is the line  between a "weak" or "strong" mind? And, ultimately, what is the point that Lovecraft is trying to  make with all this? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
To answer these questions, we need to get to the root of the problem. When we looked at fear,  we saw that we are most afraid of unanswered questions. But, looking at madness, we see that  trying to answer these unanswered questions  -  being curious and imaginative enough  -  leads us  to madness. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So...what do we do with this chiasma? What lies in this chasm between fear and madness?  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well...that's an answer for another time. But...be certain you want to know the answer. After  all, knowledge is dangerous. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Knowledge 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Disclaimer 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Welcome! In this video, we are going to talk about fear, mental illness, and existential,  epistemological dread. If this is something that makes you uncomfortable, then you might want  to skip this video.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you're a-okay engaging with this conversation, then welcome! 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I also want to list a quick spoiler warning for the following stories: 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- "The Call of Cthulhu" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- "At the Mountains of Madness" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
With that out of the way, let's get started...
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Background 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all  its contents. We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it  was not meant that we should voyage far. The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have  hitherto harmed us little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that we shall either go  mad from the revelation or flee from the deadly light into the peace and safety of a new dark  age."  -  H.P. Lovecraft, "The Call of Cthulhu" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Over the last few weeks, we've explored H.P. Lovecraft's stories, looking specifically at fear and  madness. If you haven't watched those yet, the links to them are in the description below, and,  uh...you should really check them out because...this video probably won't make a ton of sense  without them. So, stop this video, go watch those, and then come back. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- cut to black --- 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Welcome back! So... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Whether it's the fear of not knowing or the madness from knowing, knowledge is at the center of  the fiction of H.P. Lovecraft. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But...why? What is Lovecraft trying to say about knowledge? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fear and Madness? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, let's review: Lovecraft wrote a lot about fear and about madness. He evoked a fear of  unknown  -  and unknowable  -  things, which played with the discomfort produced by being  confronted by the uncanny. Not knowing is uncomfortable at best, and terrifying at worst.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lovecraft also wrote a lot about madness. When characters poked around and delved into deep,  dark places searching for answers to deep, dark questions  -  when they tried to resolve the  uncanny  -  they went mad. Learning those secrets drove people insane, and creative, imaginative,  intelligent characters were even more susceptible to this madness. Knowing  -  even just the desire  to know  -  was dangerous. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, here we have a conundrum. We are given a sort of paradox of knowledge. Not knowing  something  -  having something be unknown to us  -  is frightening. It's uncomfortable. It's...bad. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But knowing something  -  having secrets revealed to us  -  drives us mad. It's also bad. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, are we doomed to choose between living lives of ignorance, never asking questions but  living in fear, or learning about the world and going mad from the awesome and awful truths of  it all? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Or is there a middle ground? Is there a line between the fear of the unknown and the danger of  the known? Is there a spectrum of knowing? How much knowledge is enough? How much is  safe to know?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...Is anything safe to know? Or are our lives condemned to be pendulums constantly swinging  from fear to madness, madness to fear, living in perpetual discomfort and uncertainty and  insanity? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...Is there such a thing as safe knowledge? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Intro to Epistemology 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The study of knowledge is known as epistemology, and it's one of the oldest branches of  philosophy. I'm not going to get into the nitty-gritty of the actual philosophical theories,  because...it's a lot. But there are a couple of important and interesting thought experiments  posed by epistemology.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Imagine that you and a friend are trying to make a decision, and because you are both indecisive  people, you've decided to base your decision on a coin toss. You flick the coin in the air, it  rotates a few dozen times, and then you catch it in your palm. Immediately, you cover the coin  with your other hand, so that you can expose the result in a big, dramatic reveal. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But, until the coin is exposed...what is the state of the coin? Is it heads or tails? Is it, definitively  either? Is it both? ...neither? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is similar  -  as I'm sure you've noticed  -  to the famous "Schrodinger's Cat" thought  experiment. If you have a cat in a box along with a lethal Rube Goldberg machine, until you look  into the box to confirm the state of the cat  -  alive or dead  -  then the cat is considered to be both alive and dead, simultaneously. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
While Schrodinger was a quantum physicist, not a philosopher, his thought experiment has been  used by philosophers to question the nature of reality, of facts, of paradoxes, and of how we  know what we know. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The coin problem and Schrodinger's cat are both more complicated ways to ask the question, "If  a tree falls in a forest, but no one is around to hear it, does it make a sound?" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
While, physically, the answer is surely "yes," we still need to ask..."How can we be sure of  that?" How do we know that reality exists outside of our observations?  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Metaphysics and epistemology are intertwined in the question of whether or not there is such a  thing as unobserved reality. But what does this mean for our initial question about the power of  knowledge and its role in the fate of our minds? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well...there isn't really an answer to this. Philosophers and physicists and poets have been  asking these questions for thousands of years without any real answer. There are no facts or data  to give a concrete, objective conclusion.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But, there are theories. Lots of theories. Centuries' worth of theories. There's the idea that  nothing is real, that everything is real, that it doesn't matter what is "real" or not (the only thing 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
that matters is what we perceive and interact with). There's skepticism and rationalism and  nihilism. And...no one has the answer. We just have lots of "maybe"s. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
One "maybe"  -  one theory of how knowledge and reality interact  -  that is particularly interesting  and applicable to us is the idea that knowledge creates reality. You see, we have this idea of  "facts" as some kind of objectively "correct" interpretation of reality. But what differentiates a  "fact" from "knowledge"? How do we "know" facts? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well...this theory posits that "knowledge" isn't a "thing" on its own. It cannot exist independent  from a person. Knowledge is a link between a person and a fact. Reality may exist outside us, but  "knowing" is what connects us to reality. Knowing something makes it...real. Gives it power.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Think back to the coin toss example from before. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The coin...has landed either heads or tails...that's a fact. But as long as [you don't  uncover your hand] this fact remains unknown; it is not yet within the realm of  knowledge. Nor do facts become knowledge simply by being written down. If you write  the sentence `The coin has landed heads.' on one slip of paper and `The coin has landed  tails.' on another, then you will have written down a fact on one of the slips, but you still  won't have gained knowledge of the outcome of the coin toss. [The fact  -  the "reality"  -  is there, somewhere, but it's not known, so it holds no real power.] Knowledge demands  some kind of access to a fact on the part of some living subject. Without a mind to access  it, whatever is stored in libraries and databases won't be knowledge, but just ink marks  and electronic traces. ...[T]here is no knowledge that dangles unattached to any subject.  Unlike water or gold, knowledge always belongs to someone. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If knowledge equals reality, and knowledge must be attached to someone, then if you are the  only person who knows something, you are the single thread that attaches that knowledge to  reality. You are the person who makes that thing real. The only person.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Knowledge in Lovecraft 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Lovecraft's stories, knowledge is a dangerous thing. It doesn't just drive people mad, but it  gets people killed.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In "The Call of Cthulhu," our protagonist Francis Thurston is going through some of the old  documents from his recently deceased uncle. His uncle, George Angell, had been studying an  enigmatic cult, and its connections to maritime disasters and some mysterious carved statuettes.  Francis sees that this research is unfinished, and it piques his interest, and he decides to finish it  for his late uncle. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The uncanny elements of the small statue, of the eerie notes and letters from his uncle's  informants, of the odd, globally ubiquitous dreams had by artists and scientists of a gargantuan,  terrible, beast rising out of the ocean... These things lead Francis to travel around the world  seeking answers to his questions: What is the figure in the statue and in the visions? What caused  the dreams and the disasters? Who are the cults and what are their goals? And, ultimately, how is  all of this connected?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Francis follows the trails of information, and he ends up in Oslo, Norway, where he wishes to  talk to a retired sailor named Gustaf Johansen, someone who, according to reports, was one of  the only survivors of one of the maritime disasters that, according to legend, was caused by a  great beast. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
When he goes to the Johansen house, however, he discovers that the man has died, and his late  wife says that he had returned "broken," and ended up dying in a freak accident (which Francis  attributes to an enigmatic and murderous cult). Francis finds that Johansen had left a letter  recounting his experience, written in English so his wife could not read it. In the letter, Johansen  describes the journey, which started out normal, but ended with him and his crew landing on an  odd island, covered in immense, unearthly stone monoliths in shapes that should not even be  physically possible. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The crew inspect the great, unnatural architecture, and, during their inspection, discover a giant  door in the ground, leading down...to some unknown depths. They, of course, open it. Because  human curiosity is unending.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And then...out from the door, out from somewhere...deep...underground...comes a beast. A  monstrosity unlike any other. A scaly, tentacled creature as tall and foreboding as a cliff-face. An  unearthly, unknowable, unreal...thing. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cthulhu. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Johansen managed to escape back to his boat and outrun the being and ended up being saved by  another vessel at sea. He came back home, told an abridged version of his story to the press,  wrote down and then hid the unabridged, fully detailed version, and then...was killed by the Cult  of Cthulhu for what he had seen. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
That tale, on top of the information gathered by his uncle and then by himself, is where our  protagonist Francis ends his own story. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
That was the document I read, and now I have placed it in the tin box beside the bas relief and the papers of Professor Angell. With it shall go this record of mine -- this test of  my own sanity, wherein is pieced together that which I hope may never be pieced  together again. I have looked upon all that the universe has to hold of horror, and even  the skies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me. But I  do not think my life will be long. As my uncle went, as poor Johansen went, so I shall go.  I know too much, and the cult still lives. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cthulhu still lives, too, I suppose, again in that chasm of stone which has shielded  him since the sun was young. His accursed city is sunken once more, for  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
the Vigilant sailed over the spot after the April storm; but his ministers on earth still  bellow and prance and slay around idol-capped monoliths in lonely places. He must have  been trapped by the sinking whilst within his black abyss, or else the world would by  now be screaming with fright and frenzy. Who knows the end? What has risen may sink,  and what has sunk may rise. Loathsomeness waits and dreams in the deep, and decay  spreads over the tottering cities of men. A time will come -- but I must not and cannot 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
think! Let me pray that, if I do not survive this manuscript, my executors may put caution  before audacity and see that it meets no other eye. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Francis Thurston knew too much. He had learned too much. He made connections between  things and about things that should never have been made.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The knowledge is what killed his uncle and what killed Gustaf Johansen. And it is what will kill  him, too. All of these men tried to protect the world from the knowledge they had gained.  Professor Angell hid his documents in a locked case; Johansen wrote his story in a language his  wife  -  the inheritor of his belongings  -  did not know; and Francis ends his tale with a plea to his  killers: "Don't let anyone else see this. For the good of humanity, don't let anyone else learn  what I have learned." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...And yet... None of these men made real, permanent moves toward obscuring or destroying  the knowledge. They said they wanted to protect people. Yet all they did was make their cursed  knowledge all the more enticing to the prying eyes of those who would seek it out.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
They could have destroyed what they knew. Burned the documents. Thrown the statuettes in the  ocean. Never written down their memories, taking them to their grave.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But they didn't. Why?  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Knowledge is dangerous. Knowledge is a responsibility; you know something  -  you are one of  the only people in the world to know something  -  you are the one responsible for keeping that  knowledge, because, without you, it wouldn't exist.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But knowledge...is addictive. It holds onto you and begs you not to let it go. It's a virus, a  disease, that gains power the more people it infects. And, like a toxoplasma, it takes over its host  and drives them, even against their own wellbeing. Because, without the host...it would die. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For Lovecraft, knowledge of a cosmic horror  -  knowing of something that should remain  unknown  -  means that you have brought that cosmic horror into reality. You have confirmed the  existence of something that could end the world. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If this weren't terrifying enough, imagine being the one person to know of the existence of such  a thing. Remember the coin example from before  -  if knowledge and reality are intertwined and  knowledge must be attached to someone, then reality is too. If you, and you alone, have the  knowledge of a preternatural monstrosity, then you and you alone are its tie to humanity. To  reality. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
You are responsible for it. You have been cursed with knowing of its existence and thus giving  its existence meaning and power and reality. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
It's no wonder so many of his characters went mad. They learned things that no human mind  should have come into contact with. They were faced with things that were outside human  comprehension. They were shown a reality that was so terrible that they either had to convince 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
themselves it wasn't real, or they had to accept it and understand that they  -  as the sole person  who had learned of it  -  was its sole connection to humanity. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
It's no wonder why so many of his stories start with the protagonists not wanting to talk about  their experiences. They know that the more people know about something, the more real that  thing becomes. And they don't want what they know to be real. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In "At the Mountains of Madness," our protagonist William Dyer is giving an argument; he's  trying to convince another group of scientists not to travel to the South Pole to do research. To  do so, he tells the story of his own Antarctic expedition, and the terrible knowledge he came  back with. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
See, he has to tread a fine line here. He doesn't want to tell too much, because what he knows is  dangerous. He doesn't want to curse anyone else with the awful knowledge he holds. But he also  needs to give good, concrete reasons why the southern expedition shouldn't go on. And he's  arguing with scientists, who, notoriously need detailed justification for things. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He has to decide how much knowledge is too much. What the safe amount is. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And, ultimately, he decides that he will tell them everything...everything except the one vision  that drove his friend mad. The one thing that sent him over the edge. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He'll tell them everything else. He'll tell them all the dark details of the creatures that came  before the earth was even formed. He'll tell them about the great albino penguins that inhabit the  furthest reaches of the South Pole. He'll tell them about the barrel-shaped, star-footed aliens  encased in ice and the immense and formless slime creature that hunts them. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He'll tell them about the sounds and the smells and the fear evoked by these beasts. He'll tell  them about how he and his friend ran for their lives through the tunnels and streets of a  physically impossible cityscape. He'll tell them about the secrets of time and space and life. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But he won't tell them about the final image. The...thing...that his friend saw out the back  window of their plane as they flew from the ancient, icy, cursed city.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He won't tell them, because if he did...then it would be real. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
These examples don't really answer the questions we posed at the beginning. How do we know  what we know? What role does knowledge play in our reality? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But...that's because there are no answers to these questions. Not yet, and probably not ever. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ultimately, there is no such thing as certainty. Not just within the field of epistemology but  within all of philosophy, within all of life. We don't have any answers, even though we are 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
always looking for them. Humans are good at asking questions. The universe just isn't good at  providing answers. So...we come up with our own, as flawed and incomplete as they may be. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nothing is really known. Even science is just repeated approximations of reality. When we do  experiments, we just create a petri dish of our universe and poke and prod until we get  information  -  information that we then filter through our own fallible brains and then spit out on  the other side. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This  -  the discomfort of knowing that we will never really know anything  -  is what Lovecraft  was exploring. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So...what does this mean? Does it mean we should never ask questions? That we should give up  on science and art and just live in the dirt, churning out a useless, meaningless existence? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...Probably not. Lovecraft felt that knowledge was a worthwhile endeavor. He just also thought  that it was a dangerous one. That knowledge  -  that knowing too much  -  could be damaging.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He was also...a bad man. He thought too highly of himself and was bigoted towards others. He  thought that some kinds of people could never access certain kinds of knowledge or  enlightenment or philosophical greatness. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For him, knowledge and understanding of the universe, if accessible at all, was only accessible  for the white, the educated, the cultured, the "well-bred." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He also believed the maxim that "knowledge is power." And...with great power comes great  responsibility. For Lovecraft, the white, educated, cultured, "well-bred" people were responsible  for collecting and protecting the world's knowledge  -  collecting it for themselves, but protecting  it from feebler minds. From those who were afraid of asking questions, afraid of the unknown,  but also those for whom knowledge would be a real danger. Those weak, uneducated people  who, if given access to such powerful, dangerous, awesome knowledge, would use it only for  selfish  -  or worse  -  ends.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So...maybe we shouldn't take our epistemological ethics from a raging racist who lived a  hundred years ago. But what does that leave us with? I mean, what do we do with this? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, one option is to...keep looking. To search out knowledge, unafraid. We should keep  thinking about these questions. The questions that are unanswerable, but that are still worth  asking. We need to keep thinking about the dark things. Keep looking into the depths of our  universe and ourselves. Knowledge of all of these things may be dangerous  -  we may not like  what we find. But that doesn't mean it's not worth trying to find. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...Or does it? Is the darkness around us...too much? Too dark? Too unknown? If we keep  looking, who knows what we might find? Who knows what kind of answers might lurk there?  What kind of unknowable terrors lie just outside of our reach? And if we find them...what then?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Knowledge is power and it is what keeps us tied to reality. But what if we discover knowledge  that is outside reality? Outside what we can even fathom? What then? What happens to a  person's mind when they are faced with something truly unknowable?  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Is it worth the risk? Is asking these questions even... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
You can never un-know. So you must be careful about what you let yourself learn. Knowledge is  a dangerous thing. Wield it cautiously. Don't make the same mistake I did. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"It is absolutely necessary, for the peace and safety of mankind, that some of earth's dark, dead  corners and unplumbed depths be let alone; lest sleeping abnormalities wake to resurgent life,  and blasphemously surviving nightmares squirm and splash out of their black lairs to newer and  wider conquests."  -  H.P. Lovecraft, "At the Mountains of Madness"
The Man Who's Too Smart For Books
This Alpha Male Hates Books

Intro
Okay, folks, I know I usually try to keep it positive around here, but a few days ago, I found the wildest, most terrible thing, and I need to share it with you. So buckle in because this is going to be a trip. Let's go.
Who Is He and How Did I Find Him?
Before I jump straight into things, I do want to give a quick content warning. I'm going to be briefly talking about some pretty heavy stuff like domestic abuse, human trafficking, and pick-up-artistry. So feel free to skip this one if you need to. But for the rest of you - let's get into this.
This man is Emory Andrew Tate III and he's well-known for two things: Being a champion kickboxer..........and being a pick-up-artist super creep. If you've heard of him, it's probably because this guy has been talked about by most, if not all of the big commentary channels, because everything he does is just terrible.
Like, he's a pick-up-artist, which is shitty on its own, but also, when you look him up you get lots of articles with headlines like this. And you can read about how he got kicked off of Big Brother for hitting one of the women - like it's on video and everything - though he says it was consensual, so... Use your judgment.
And one of the worst things, which is only alleged, and so this is all speculation... But one of the worst things is how he got in trouble with Romanian authorities - he lives in Romania because, according to him, they have lax sexual assault law. So why did he get into trouble with Romanian authorities, you ask? Well, for...allegedly...human trafficking. It's alleged that he had women held in his house against their will. And I think some of those charges have been dropped, and, again, this is alleged and only speculation....but...  
Now, it's not speculation that he also pressures his partners into sex work, which he takes 75% of the profits from. He literally brags about it on his channel. So...there's lots of reasons this guy is a bad dude. But I found him through this TikTok: (play video). And, I just... It is so beautiful, y'know? To find someone whose outlook on life is so wildly different from yours. It really brings everything else into focus, y'know? 
Anyway, I'm not here to make fun of this specific video. I mean, I could, but I don't know that I need to. It's shitty and also kinda silly, and honestly probably says more about him and his brain than about books, generally. I don't want to armchair diagnose him, or anyone, but if your brain "moves too quickly" to read books, it might be worth considering whether you have a learning disability, or possibly even dyslexia.
So I saw this video, and it's wild, and I needed to learn more about this guy. I mean, if this video is this bad, what is his other content like? Well, I checked out his YouTube channel, and he makes videos about...how we're living in the Matrix and in order to get out you have to...go to his cool boy summer camp that costs...$5,000. And what are you getting when you go to his summer camp? Well, let's go to his website and check it out.
*do some kind of website montage (maybe like cutting between increasingly wild images from the site)*
Okay, so we have Hu 2? This is some kind of "university" where he teaches you how to hustle...? And then we have the War Room, which is the $5,000 boys club where you get to...hang out with bald muscular men and smoke cigars and do yoga. Which, honestly... Ideal vacation.
And then we have... Tales of Wudan? What is this? (click on link, maybe do another smash cut - zoom in on word "book")
Book Overview
So someone who is unequivocally anti-book....has written a book. I needed to read it. So I put in my email, signed up to get it....and....I didn't receive an email. I didn't get anything. Dude. I gave you my email. Give me my ebook.
Well, while I wait to get this email, let's look at this preview we get on the website: "In a previous life, I lived 5000 human years atop Wudan mountain. I remember every lived second." Ooh, okay, so this is going to be a fiction story about a character learning martial arts at a secluded mountaintop monastery. I can get behind that.
"Life is competition. Competition is violence." (make cringe face) "The largest, strongest, most beautiful tree. Violently crushed the surrounding saplings, in the quest for resources." Andrew...do you know how trees work?
      "Atop Wudan, I told priest master Yan Hui, how at peace I felt amongst the trees. I could feel life all around me. Sitting at the foot of the largest tree, I asked him.
      "When life is so beautiful, why do we fight?"
      His reply was simple. "Do you think the largest tree you sit beneath, grew so tall amongst many, if it didn't fight?""
Okay, confirmed, Andrew Tate does not know how trees work. Cool.
      "You are MEANT to struggle. You are here to SUFFER. If you do neither of these things, you are either dead or invisible. You are a nobody. And every female will prove to you - you may as well not exist. Evolution requires PAIN. We are born valueless. And you either build yourself into a King - or you fail."
Okay, so I think this probably gives us the best idea of what to expect in the stories. Lots of violence, lots of suffering, lots of proving yourself to females, and our protagonist building himself into a King. I don't think that's how monarchies work, either, but sure, that's fine. Sounds great.
So this is all I got, and then when I checked my email a few hours later, I did have an email from Andrew Tate. ....except the email was just the text of the prologue that he has on his website. It turns out that when you put in your email to get this "e-book," what you're really doing is subscribing to daily emails, where every day he sends you one of the stories. 
This wasn't good enough for me. I needed this book - and I needed the whole thing. I couldn't wait weeks and weeks for all the stories to filter down into my inbox - I didn't even know how many there'd be. So I did a little Googling. It had to be somewhere online, right? 
Well, I found the artist who did the work that's on the Tate website, and he'd put up some of the pages online. But there were only 5 stories on this artist's portfolio and I wanted to see if there were more.
So I did some more Googling, and found that he actually shares all the stories over on the official Tales of Wudan Twitter account - he just breaks each story into tweet-sized snippets and puts them together in threads. So I spent, like, 3 hours combing through every thread on this profile to find the beginning of each story, and then putting those in a thread unroller, and then copying and pasting them into another document and reformatting them to actually be in short-story format.
And then I actually read them. And....hoooooooo boy.
Like, the writing quality is fine. It's not great, but it's better than some of the self-published Amazon shovel-ware that I've read. There are a few technical issues here and there, but honestly I don't even really care about those. I mean, it's free, I'm not expecting it to be edited or anything.
Stylistically, it's not bad. There are actually a few lines I really like, like "He had executed a perfect kill...exploding all of today and all of his tomorrows" and "he took a short pause and turned his head towards the sky, as if he was acknowledging the gods of storytelling, commanding them to pay attention" - and there are a few fight scenes that are paced really well, but let's actually take a few minutes to talk about these stories.
Analyzing the Stories
So all told, I found 22 stories, and they're really not that bad. They're all fiction stories that act as lessons that the protagonist - who is just an author insert, very clearly - learns from his martial arts master, Po, and then imparts to the reader. And while there are the occasional spelling mistakes, the actual content is...fine. The stories are actually entertaining. 
There's one about how the protagonist is curious about a scar that Master Po has, and he spends the whole story trying to figure out how he got it, without actually asking Po, because Po - as we see in most of the stories - is prone to violent outbursts. And it's actually really good. I was actually invested in learning about this scar. And there's one story about how the protagonist and Master Po go out to this old burial ground and punch a bunch of ghosts. And like...that's just objectively cool.
But the most interesting thing is that all these stories have moral lessons, but most of those lessons...don't really seem to fit with what Andrew says in his videos. Like, the one about punching ghosts, it ends with Po showing the protagonist that his words are stronger than any of his martial arts stances.
And there's another story about punching trees, where the protagonist is asked to prove his skill by killing a tree, and he tries to punch it a bunch and ends up breaking all the bones in his hand, and the master he's working with is like, "You haven't learned anything!" and then proceeds to pick off all the leaves, which will, eventually, kill the tree. And the moral of this is clearly work smarter, not harder. And sometimes you need to think through your problems instead of just brute-forcing them.
Another story is about dreams, and how Master Po asks all the adepts to share their dreams with him, but he hates them. Like, Po hates the whole concept of dreams. And he ends up working the protagonist to the bone, until the protagonist is too exhausted to have dreams, and I take this one to mean don't let your dreams be dreams? Like action and work are more important than just dreaming about something.
Other morals are about not being afraid of making mistakes, and how failure can sometimes be a good thing, and not letting people live rent-free in your brain, and how no matter how strong someone is, they will die - it's just up to you how you're remembered before that happens.
And these morals are sort of basic, but they're not bad. But the interesting thing is that, when you compare them to what Andrew says in his videos, and even what he says in the prologue to the stories... They don't really match up, do they? His other messages are all about violence and power and taking what you want and being above it all.
But these stories aren't about that. They're about understanding that violence isn't always the answer. They're about using your words instead of your fists. They're about patience and meditation and learning from your mistakes. And, sure, not all of the morals are great or make sense - like, there's two stories about dragons and pearls, and...not believing dragon propaganda? And I didn't really get that. I don't know what he was trying to say about that.
But, the single most interesting element was how much crying happens in these stories. There are half a dozen stories that feature the protagonist and/or Master Po crying. And not in pain. I mean, one of them is about crying in pain, but the rest are actual emotional vulnerability. And as someone who was called "the king of toxic masculinity," you'd think Andrew would see crying as a weakness.
But he doesn't. Not in these stories, at least. He seems to have a relatively healthy view of masculinity and emotions in these stories. And that's weird, right? This difference between what Andrew says and what he writes? And when I sat and thought about this difference, it actually made me...sad. And for a while I didn't really know why.
But after reflecting on it for a few days, I came to the conclusion that it makes me sad because of what these stories reveal about Andrew. They tell us that this guy appreciates non-violence, that he understands the importance of being in touch with your feelings, and that he's smart. They tell us that he doesn't necessarily believe all of the things he talks about. They tell us that, somewhere inside him, he has pretty positive views of masculinity and emotions - and maybe not of women, but of lots of other things. We'll take what we can get.
And they tell us that his writing is...pretty good - not just in quality, but in content - like it's about good things. And...I almost wonder... If he'd had someone in his life, early, maybe a teacher, who told him "Hey, Andrew, this story is pretty good. I bet you could grow up to be a successful writer someday." ...would he have turned out differently? And when I thought that - when I considered what could have been if he didn't turn out like...this... It...broke my heart.
Why Does It Matter?
Now, don't get me wrong: This guy is a terrible person. He is cruel and manipulative and has allegedly done some genuinely evil things. He's a bad dude.
But. I also believe that people can change. I believe that, given the right amount of time and space and ability for introspection, people can change for the better.  And I think that if Andrew is found guilty of some of the things he's alleged to have done, and if he ends up spending several years in a space where there's not much he can do but introspect, then it's possible he...could change.
I don't know if it'll happen. I don't know if he'll be found guilty, I don't know if he will have a change of heart, I don't know if he even can at this point, but this writing gives me a little bit of hope. This isn't the writing of someone who is evil to his core. And if he's not evil to his core, then he has the capacity for change.
There's this saying: "When people show you who they are, believe them." And I think this is true, but I also think there are different kinds of "showing." Andrew's actions show us something - they show us a very bad guy who is the cause of a lot of pain and darkness in the world. But his writing also shows us something. And it shows us something different.
And you might be saying, Zoe, this guy is shitty, he's probably just lying, and making up faux-mystic b.s. for his fans. But I don't think that's the case. These stories have clear effort and care put into them. 
So while I think we should take his actions at face value and judge him accordingly, I also think we need to pay attention to what his writing is telling us. And it's telling us that Andrew Tate is a complicated dude. He is bad...but that's not all he is.
Conclusion
This video was supposed to be fun, silly junk food. It was supposed to be just me coming on here and dunking on an awful dude. I mean, this guy is awful. He's terrible. He says terrible things. And it was gonna be fun. We were gonna talk about how shitty he is, crack a few jokes about how bad his writing is, and then wash our hands and move on.
But, instead, it was actually really hard. And not for the reasons you'd expect. It wasn't hard because of the awful, violent, ignorant shit that Andrew constantly talks about. That sucks, but I can tune it out easily enough. What was hard...was that I was...genuinely affected by this guy. I've already touched on how his writing hit those English teacher heartstrings, but there was something else, too.
As I was scrubbing through his social media to gather all the stories, I found this post. It's about his dad, Emory Tate II, who was a chess grandmaster, and was actually pretty well renowned for it. But in this post, Andrew is talking about how his dad passed away a few years ago, and how he wants to live to honor him and his legacy, and...he refers to his dad as "Master Po" - and that's when it dawned on me: the art for Master Po...
Master Po is Andrew's dad. I don't want to speculate or psychoanalyze or anything, but I don't think it's outside the realm of possibility that writing these stories was Andrew's way of dealing with the passing of his father. It was his way of dealing with the weight of losing a parent who - if he was anything like Master Po - was not only an imposing, impressive presence, but also had high expectations for Andrew, and really took his frustration out on him if he didn't meet those expectations.
Andrew is the oldest of his siblings, and he's named after his dad - his full name is Emory Andrew Tate III - he very explicitly has the weight of his dad's legacy thrust upon him, and that...sucks. It's hard. In the post, he even says "I am his earthly representation. I carry his name, and the title of the most brilliant specimen of man alive has passed from him to me." That's a lot to put on a kid.
Seeing how he talks about his dad, and then looking back at how he writes about Master Po... It really puts those stories in a new light. There's one story about Master Po's death, and long story short - literally, it's the longest story by far - he and Po go on, essentially, a suicide mission, and they wipe out this whole army, but just as Master Po kills the opposing commander, the commander stabs him with a poison dart, which then also kills Po. 
The protagonist rushes over and desperately makes the herbal tea that can cure the poison. But it's too late. In this field of corpses and destruction, cradling the lifeless body of Master Po, he falls asleep. And when he wakes up...Po is alive. Barely, but he's alive. And Po gives the protagonist a characteristically strict punishment for getting blood on his shirt, and the two go back to Wudan. Good as new.
And now knowing who Po is... It genuinely...really emotionally affects me. And I hate it. I want to hate this guy. I want to laugh at him and dunk on him and tear apart everything he makes. But I can't.
And I even debated not making this video at all, because I really didn't want you all to think that I was trying to excuse Andrew's behavior. Because I'm not trying to do that. This guy sucks. But I do think it's easy to see people like this and forget that they...are people. Or, at least, forget that they're complex, dynamic, complicated people.
It would have been so easy to just find these stories, laugh at them for 10 minutes, and then move on. But I couldn't. And I just hope that that's not a weakness on my part. I hope it's not just me being overly sympathetic or too charitable or naive. And I'm so afraid of saying the wrong thing or being misunderstood, and it's terrifying.
But I hope that you understand what I've tried to do here. I hope this emotional rollercoaster was at least a fun ride. Because...it's supposed to be, y'know? Even after writing all this out and dealing with these conflicting emotions, I still decided to make this video and release it. Because I still think it's worth it. I think this adventure we've been on is valuable. Or at least I hope so.
But let me know what you think in the comments below, and thanks for sticking around til the end of the video. I know this one was a little different, so let me know if you want me to make more things like this in the future.
I'm currently working on the Squeecore video that a lot of you requested, and I'm hoping it'll be out in the next couple weeks, so if you want to be alerted when that comes out, then subscribe and ring the bell.
And if you want to support me directly, then go ahead and join my Patreon, which I have linked in the description, or hit that "join" button next to the "subscribe" button, and you can join the wonderful people whose names you see scrolling here. 
I want to give an especially huge thank you to A Tasty Snack, Adam, Al Sweigart, Dylan, Justin Lowery, Robert Bradford, Science Punk Sellout, and Will Swanson - thank you all so very much.
And finally, we have our patron poem of the video. For Emma Silver, this is "Ode to a Cobra"

Ode to a Cobra

your venom-heavy fangs
hang fetid and wet
quills filled with curses and slurs
dripping words that leave scars
(or worse)
turns of phrase like poison
the wells never empty
and so you go on
writing and biting
O King of the Reptiles


And until next time, stay safe, stay warm, and I'll see y'all again soon, I hope.
Bye, folks :) 
Two weeks ago, I read Annihilation, a novel by Jeff Vandermeer.

One week ago, I watched Annihilation, a film written and directed by Alex Garland.
Today, I'd like to talk about the differences between these two pieces of media that share the same name and why one works, and the other...doesn't.
I want this to be just a casual little talk, but remember  -  everything I'm going to say is just my opinion.

There are no right and wrong answers when it comes to this kind of thing.

If you disagree with me, or if you want something that's going to take a more positive look at the film, go check out go watch Folding Ideas' video, which I'll have linked in the description.
But, today, for this little rant, I'd like to talk about why I think Annihilation (the film) is a bad adaptation.
But before we get into that... I have a confession to make: I'm an English teacher, and I don't read very much fiction.
I mean, I like fiction, but only very certain subgenres of it.

I like literary sci-fi and horror, and...that's about it.


The struggle with having such specific taste is that it can be hard to find stuff I'd like.

That's where today's sponsor Likewise comes in.

Now, when I started my channel, I made a deal with myself that I'd only accept sponsorships from people who I genuinely believe have a net positive effect on the world.

So, when I have a sponsor...they have the Zoe Bee seal of approval.
Likewise is a free app that uses a combination of machine learning and actual, real humans to give you recommendations on not just books, but movies, TV shows, and podcasts.

They're great for people like me who have very niche interests, but they're also great if you find yourself spending more time looking for something to watch than...actually watching something.
The way it works is super simple  -  after you sign up, you tell them what you like, give them a few examples to work from...and then you start getting recommendations.

These recommendations come in the form of daily cards that you swipe through kind of like Tinder, and you can even post your own asks and get suggestions from other users.
So, like, if you want to find books like  -  I don't know  -  The Great Gatsby, then you can post "What are some books that are like The Great Gatsby?" and other users can just come in and respond and give you recommendations.
Once you find something you like, you can put it in a list, that can help you organize your books and it's something you can share publicly if you want.

If you follow me @zoe_bee (the insect, not the letter), you can see the couple of lists I'm working on curating right now: my spooky book collection and my collection of non-fiction creative writing guides.
And when you find that perfect book that you just have to have, you can also buy it straight from the app! Likewise has Amazon integration, so you can purchase books directly, which I think is super convenient and a really nice touch.
So if all of this sounds like something you need in your life as much as I did, then you can go to on.likewise.com/zoebee (the insect, not the letter) to download the app using the custom URL that helps support my channel.

Or if this URL is a little too long and complicated, you can just scroll down to the top of the description and click the link right there.
Again, the app is 100% free, and I honestly think Likewise might singlehandedly revive my love for fiction, so huge thank you to Likewise  -  y'all get the Zoe Bee seal of approval.


Okay, let's start by talking about what an adaption should be.

(Also  -  spoiler alert for both the book and the film.

I'm going to be talking about themes and plot points that are dependent on the "secrets" and climaxes of the stories, so if you don't want me to spoil them... Go read the book and then come back.

Also, I'm only going to be talking about the film and the first book of the trilogy.

That's it.

And I'm going to assume you are all familiar with the plot points of the book or the film, so I'm not going to waste time covering details.)
Alright, so... Book-to-film adaptations are hard.

Well, they're hard to do well.

And that's why there aren't a lot of really good adaptations out there.


One reason for this is because the medium of books and the medium of film are totally different.

There's a phrase that encapsulates this, coined by this guy Marshall McLuhan, that says "The medium is the message."
And what that means is that the medium we use to convey a message or tell a story directly affects that message or story.

There are some things you can do in text that you cannot do on film, and vice versa.
And because of this difference in medium, an adaptation can never be 1-to-1.

It is literally impossible to directly copy something from text to film.

It just cannot be done.

Even if you get character descriptions right, down to a T, you have film-medium stuff like camera angles and lighting and acting ability to contend with  -  all stuff that just isn't a part of the medium of books.
So if you go into a film expecting a perfect 1-to-1 adaptation, you're inevitably going to be disappointed.
But if a film can't be a perfect recreation of a book, then...what makes a "good" adaptation?
Well, it depends on what you want.

If you want to make a "faithful" adaptation  -  something that is as close to 1-to-1 as you can get  -  then you keep most stuff the same.


You tell the same story, with the same characters, using the same structure and order, and if there's anything that is impossible to do on film, then you either cut those or imply they happened off-screen, or you change them so that they can appear on film.

These kinds of adaptations are the most common, including things like Harry Potter and Lord of the Rings.
But sometimes you want to tell a different story using the same world and characters.

This happens a lot with adaptations of very old works, like Bible stories or even hundred-year-old novels.

In this case, you may want to update the themes, and so you tell the same story, but in a new setting or with an updated antagonist that resonates more with modern audiences.

Think, like, the 2005 War of the Worlds or the remake of Red Dawn that changed the invaders from Russian to Chinese.
Now, sometimes there's too much that is impossible to do on screen.

This is the case for a lot of stories that are dependent on character's thoughts or that have an unreliable narrator or are just...weird.

And in these cases, if you want to tell a traditional story that doesn't freak out modern audiences by being too weird or artsy, then you're going to have to change a lot.
But, in cases like these, you have to keep the heart and soul of the story.

You have to find the nugget or kernel of the source material, and hold onto that, while you alter the shell to make it fit the medium of film.
That kernel  -  that basic essence of the story  -  is the most important part.
If that kernel is the most important, then what is the kernel of Annihilation?
Well, to me, the essence of the book is uncertainty.
Throughout the story, we are uncertain of everything around our protagonist.

We're even uncertain of things within and about our protagonist.
From the very beginning, it's clear we're working with an unreliable narrator.

When the biologist talks about how they landed in Area X and she looked back to see how they had come through the barrier, she says she saw...something...but she isn't sure what...or if she even really did see anything...
Then, the party stumbles across a hole in the ground with a staircase winding downward, and the biologist wants to call it a tower, but everyone else wants to call it a tunnel.

And we, the readers, are left uncertain which it really is. Throughout Area X, we don't know what's safe, what's hostile; what's real, what isn't.

And we don't know where any of it came from.We know Area X is changing her, but we don't know if it's for better or worse; if the brightness is good or bad. The biologist  -  and the readers  -  are both uncertain what choices are made out of free will, and which are made because of the psychologist's hypnosis.
We're not sure about...well, really anything about the other characters.We only know their job descriptions  -  we don't know their names or where they're from or what their lives outside Area X are like.

And this is true of the husband character, too.When he came back, the biologist was never really certain if he was "really back" or if he was...not himself.

She doesn't know, so we don't know, and she still makes the decision to call and have him taken away.
We  -  and the biologist  -  never even know the purpose of the mission.
Everything is uncertain.
And this uncertainty leads to the uncanny, and the uncanny is what makes the story scary.
The uncanny, as I've talked about before, occurs when we're not able to categorize or label what we're seeing.

When we see something so...unnatural...so...almost something, but not quite  -  that our brains go into panic mode.
And the uncanny is all over this book.

We have a tower...that's underground.

Words that almost make sense...written in plants.

We have a dolphin...with human eyes.

Plants...that are almost humanoid.

We have a moaning creature that we only ever see the husk of  -  with an almost-human mask, and a shadowy, hulking frame.
And with all these uncanny things  -  with anything that's uncanny in any story  -  the goal isn't to defeat it  -  y'know, you're not going to shoot Cthulhu until his health bar disappears and then go loot the body and collect your XP.
No, the goal isn't to fight the uncanny.

Your goal is to understand it.
So...does the film capture this essence of the uncanny, of uncertainty and discovery and uncovering the truth?
No.
The film isn't really about uncanny horror, but terror.

And the difference  -  for me, at least  -  between horror and terror is that horror is unknown, but terror is known.

You know there's a scary creature or a chainsaw-wielding bad-guy after you.
And in the film, you definitely know a lot more than you do in the book.
You know what caused the Shimmer; you know the husband has been "replaced"; you know the things inside the Shimmer are hostile; you know it literally gets under your skin and hurts you; you know who all the characters are and what their motivations are (in part because they literally tell us. They just sit down and straight-up tell the audience, "Hey, this is who I am and why I came here!" delivered really politely in nice little digestible chunks between action sequences.)

We're even told when something is scary. We have this bear creature that mimics sounds, and when it attacks the party, they tell us "wow, wasn't that really scary?" We don't even get to have that uncertainty for ourselves.

They just tell us.

"It was so strange hearing Shepherd's voice in the mouth of the creature last night."

And when we're told things  -  when we know for certain that something is wrong and it's evil and it's alien and it wants to hurt us  -  then it isn't about understanding it, it's about defeating it.
Which is what the climax of the film is.

Lena  -  or not-Lena  -  defeats the Shimmer, burns it to the ground, and then gets to go be not-Lena with her not-husband.

Well done, team, crisis averted.
This, to me, is the biggest difference  -  and also the biggest problem  -  between the book and the film. You finish the book wondering if Area X is even all that bad  -  maybe it isn't.

Maybe it's just nature taking its course, maybe it's just the next step in evolution, maybe it is a beautiful wilderness that we are intruding on.
But you finish the movie seeing the Shimmer as the enemy and hoping it's been destroyed for good.
The book is about understanding; the film is about defeating.
Now, the film isn't bad, there are definitely parts I liked.

I really liked the flower people and how the one character turned into a plant person; I liked the crystal trees and the deer  -  it was a really pretty film.

It was genuinely beautiful, and the SFX team did a great job and should be commended for it.
And the mimicry bear was genuinely scary...until it got screen-time.

I think that was a mistake.

And I think a lot of the writing was clunky and didn't work  -  there was never a sense of wonder, at least not until the very end.
But, again, this isn't a film review; these are just some thoughts that I had to get out of my brain.

And there's a lot more that I could rant about, but I don't want this to be an hour long, so if there's anything you liked or disliked about the film or the book, be sure to leave your thoughts in the comments.
I just think the film lost the heart of the book, and so it makes for a bad adaptation.

The uncertainty of the characters and the uncanny nature of the setting is what made the book great.

The book is about not knowing.

The film is about self-destruction and aliens.
I'd heard so much good stuff about the film, and I'd heard it was this, like, hidden gem that no one watched because it came out around the same time as Arrival, and Arrival is a much better film.

But then...it was just...really lackluster. 
And disappointing.
And then I tried to see what other people thought, and everybody was like "oh my gosh, this was super great!"
And I feel like maybe I'm the crazy one because I didn't like it.
But anyway, I do really recommend reading the book, because it's absolutely phenomenal, and if you want more books like it, be sure to check out Likewise at on.likewise.com/zoebee, or using the link at the top of the description.

Like I said, it's 100% free and it has actually helped me start reading fiction again.

So, again, huge thanks to Likewise for sponsoring this video!
This video was also brought to you by my Patrons, whose names are scrolling here beside me.

And I want to give a very special thank you to Sauber, Sigve, A Tasty Snack, Comrade Fox, and Dylan.

(Dylan, you'll get your poem in the next video, I promise.)
And if you want to come join our community, I have a link in the description; you can get cool stuff like polls and poems and access to our Discord server, so if any of that sounds interesting, come check it out!
And also, if you would like to stay up to date with what is going on in my life, how videos are going, how my pets are doing, any, like, cool bugs I find in my backyard, come follow me on Twitter @Zoe_TheBee

Also, I didn't really have a good place to put this in the video, but I also recommend following the author Jeff Vandermeer on Twitter.

He's this super awesome guy who's, like, a hermit.

He just lives in the woods in Florida and writes these weird books, and he's an environmental activist and so he has all these trail cams that get all this footage of baby animals and stuff.
Like, there's this family of raccoons, and the baby raccoons come out and they play in the birdbath.
And there's also baby armadillos that, like, snuffle around in the undergrowth, and it's the cutest thing I've ever seen in my life and I love it SO MUCH
and it's amazing and he's just...a hero...and I want to be him when I grow up.

So... that's the end of the video. Stay safe, stay warm, and I'll see y'all again soon, I hope!
Propaganda for Kids
Intro
Let's say, for the sake of argument, that you're writing a kids' book. And maybe you want this kids' book to teach a lesson, like... It's okay to be different. And maybe you want to dress up this lesson in a fun, colorful story; so instead of having your book be about people, maybe it's about...shapes. And you write your story about shapes and you have this whole extended metaphor about how we don't need to fit into all the "shapes" society says we should, and it's great.
And this is all well and good, right? But what if your message wasn't as innocent as "it's okay to be different"? What if your message was "it's not okay to be different" - "being different is just for attention and it's better to listen to your parents and go along with what everyone else does"? And what if that message, like yours, was dressed up in a fun story about shapes or talking animals, and it didn't just come out and say in big, bold letters "JUST BE NORMAL"? 
See, that's the funny thing about metaphors. Metaphors are used all the time to teach concepts and moral lessons; but because they necessarily have to be separate from the concept that they're helping to explain, often metaphors are used to obfuscate more...negative arguments. If you want to hide an argument that might not be seen as "politically correct," one way to do that is to hide it in an analogy. That way, if someone points at it and says "hey, that story is just telling kids it's bad to be gay!" you can respond "no it's not, it's about shapes!"
Metaphors and analogies (and as a note, throughout this video, I'm going to be using "analogy" and "metaphor" pretty much interchangeably. They aren't exactly the same, but for our purposes here, they're close enough.) - metaphors and analogies aren't inherently bad. They are fundamental to kids' stories, and we've been using them...literally forever. Aesop's fables are full of simple analogies comparing human behaviors to animals and natural forces. And the Christian Bible is full of parables comparing people to mustard seeds and lost sheep.
But metaphors aren't just poetic, cryptic riddles and puzzles that hide secret meaning. In fact, according to cognitive linguist and my personal academic fave George Lakoff, "Metaphors create realities for us... Metaphors can be self-fulfilling prophecies." Essentially, we have these cognitive frameworks that we use to make sense of the world, and metaphors are a fundamental part of that structure. When we use metaphorical language like calling drug enforcement a "war," or referring to time as a currency that we "spend," that actually shapes how we think about drugs and war and time and money.
Now, this is something I've wanted to make a much bigger video about for a while, and so I'm not going to get into the details here, but, basically, metaphors shape how we think about things, and how we think about things affects how we act upon things, and our actions then shape the world and reinforce those metaphoric frameworks.
So, metaphors can be used as camouflage to hide harmful messages and they can fundamentally affect not just how we think about things but also the reality of things. With that in mind...let's talk about Conservative Kids' books.
(CONTENT WARNING: Before we jump in, I'd like to give a quick content warning. In this video we're going to be talking about systemic racism, gun violence, and transphobia - because this is a video about kids' books, why wouldn't we be talking about those things, right? But if those are topics you'd rather not engage with, then go ahead and skip this video. Alright, let's jump in.)
The Stories and their Metaphors
Now, I shouldn't have to say this, but: obviously, metaphors aren't just used in conservative kids' books. Progressive and left-leaning kids' stories also use metaphors, because of course they do, because everyone uses metaphors. 
But I'm not talking about those in this video. I'm talking about these particular books and the particular metaphors within them. If you are especially upset by that, then comment down below and demand that I make a similar video about Leftist kids' books, and if you really want me to do so, then make sure to give the titles of some leftist kids' books you find especially egregious. ANYWAY -- 
Today I'm going to be looking at More than Spots and Stripes, Paws off My Cannon, Elephants are not Birds, and Johnny the Walrus, and just like the kids' stories of old, these books are acting as fables - they're acting as extended metaphors or analogies for bigger issues. 
Before we can really break down these metaphors and see if they work, we first need to have some kind of test to measure the strength of the metaphors. The strength of metaphors and analogies come from how similar the two things being compared are and, more importantly, how relevant and accurate those similarities are.
So, for instance, this is why a lot of analogies for race are super clunky and don't always work. Often, people use alien species or magical species or literally just different animal species as race metaphors. But race just isn't anything like species. Different species are fundamentally biologically different. But that's not how race and ethnicity work in our world. Race, the way most people think of it, isn't biologically based. There is essentially no difference in the DNA of people of different races. Studies show that there is actually more variety in the DNA of a single racial or ethnic group than there is across racial or ethnic groups. 
Now, I'm not going to get into the deep nitty-gritty of this, but if you're interested in exploring more of the dangers of race analogies, I recommend checking out the Lindsay Ellis video on Bright, and Jack Saint's Zootopia video, both of which I have linked in the description.
Anyway, in addition to judging the strength of the metaphors in these books, while we're looking at them, I want us to ask ourselves, "What are the implications of these metaphors?" If we take them to their logical conclusions, what do they reveal about the authors' worldview? So, let's jump in and take a closer look at some of these metaphors, so we can get a better understanding of exactly what kind of weird kids propaganda these publishers are peddling.

More than Spots and Stripes
The first book we're going to look at is More Than Spots and Stripes, written by conservative comedians "The Hodgetwins." The story follows Rebel, a spotted cheetah, who races alongside other spotted and striped cheetahs at school. But while Rebel is preparing for the big race, she's told by an older spotted cheetah that those striped cheetahs are cheaters. 
In the past, they used to throw banana peels on the track to trip the spotted cheetahs, and now, even though they are no longer throwing banana peels, they're still, somehow, cheating. The older cheetah tells Rebel and the other spotted cheetahs that instead of training for the race, they should protest against the striped cheetahs, because they're making the race inherently unfair.
When the day of the race comes, Rebel comes in last place, and she realizes that she was tricked by the older cheetah into focusing on being angry at the other cheetahs instead of training. She vows to stop blaming others for the acts of their ancestors and learns that it's hard work - not the pattern of your fur - that determines your success.
This is a book about race relations - ...get it? Race? Because it's about a race? - and its message is built on the metaphors that life is like a track race, it's something you can train for that has a clear end-goal and winner, and that racism is a distraction meant to trip you up, either as a metaphorical "banana" on the metaphorical "racetrack of life," or as a conspiracy being peddled by older generations.
But this metaphor doesn't really work, because clearly not everyone has the same end-goal, and it's not really something you can train for, either. Some people are born at the finish line, born into wealthy families, and they won't ever have to work if they don't want to.
And the rules of the race aren't a great stand-in for systemic racism, either. Laws and the enforcement of those laws are squishy, they're incredibly complex, and they're hard to pin down. That's part of why systemic racism is so insidious - it hides between the lines. A track race has, like...2 or 3 rules max, right?
But what are the implications here? Well, these metaphors work to reinforce the idea that the US is a meritocracy. It's all about hard work and individual responsibility. There's no such thing as systemic racism, and the people who are telling you there is, are just trying to distract you so they can take advantage of you.
If you work hard enough, you can "win." And if you complain...you're wasting energy that you could put into hard work. So don't complain if you feel like something is unfair.
Before we move on, there is one more metaphor I want to look at in this books. They compare the throwing of banana peels onto the track to...overt racism, like during the Jim Crow era (racism that happened in the past) - but -- - At the end, when Rebel is running in the big race...someone throws a banana peel onto the track.
They acknowledge that overt racism still exists and still affects people. BUT -- this metaphor breaks down, too, because the banana peel could trip the striped cheetahs too. It's not like it's just something that spotted cheetahs are susceptible to. So it doesn't even work as a racism analogy! It just utterly fails on every level.
This book is...not good.

Paws off my Cannon
This next book is about gun control. Because kids aren't learning enough about guns these days. You'd think kids would know plenty about guns, what with all the school shootings that no one is doing anything about.
But no, you're totally right, kids should learn more about how gun rights are integral to maintaining a safe (CITATION NEEDED) society. Sure.
So this book is Paws off my Cannon, and it's from the same publishers that published the last one, but this book was written by Dana Loesch, a radio and TV host....and also a spokesperson for the NRA. So we know that this book about gun control is going to take the most fair and balanced look at the issue. And she was also a writer and editor at Breitbart, so she definitely knows a thing or two about moderate, even-handed writing.
Anyway the story itself is pretty basic: there's an idyllic village where everyone eats cupcakes all day, but then they get overrun by evil hyenas who shoot everyone with coconut cannons and steal their cupcakes. Half of the village says that they should arm themselves with coconut cannons to defend themselves from the hyenas. And the other half of the village says that, no, they should just put up little wooden signs that say "no cannons" and then the hyenas won't be allowed to bring their weapons into the village.
So they separate into two, the hyenas invade again, they take the cupcakes from the "wooden sign" side, who then learn that they do need coconut cannons to defend themselves, and then when the hyenas come back later, they shoot them with their cannons and scare them off and get to eat their cupcakes in peace again.
Now, one metaphor that I think is interesting is that Dana sees gun control legislation as a wooden sign - which, to be clear, it isn't. There are many differences between legislation (something that usually comes with some form of action and oversight) and simple signs (which are literally just words built on hope).
But the more interesting metaphor that I want to look at in this story is how Dana compares hyenas to criminals - specifically criminals who commit armed robbery. Both criminals and the hyenas in this story break the law. They are using weapons to take things that don't belong to them, and they are hurting other people in the process.
But listen to how the villagers describe the hyenas: "Hyenas were the only bad thing about living in Mushroom Village. They were lazy and didn't like cooking, so they roamed around looking for a sweet meal to steal."
This reveals some added depth to the analogy. Because it shows us exactly what Dana thinks about people who commit crimes. This story is teaching kids that we need guns to defend ourselves against "lazy" "bad" people - people who you know are bad by how they look; people who are bad because of some inherent biological nature; people who do "bad" things just because they're "lazy" and don't want to work.
When we stop to think about the implications of this metaphor, we can start to see the logic behind the conservative position on crime. If criminals are like these lazy, dangerous, inherently bad hyenas, then of course the only solution is to either lock them up or shoot them. They're bad. That's all they are.
Now, I know that these kids' books are oversimplified on purpose. That's the whole point of analogies and metaphors in stories. Most kids' media has one-dimensional bad guys. But in a country where gun violence is so prevalent, I think we can afford to be a little more nuanced.
We never stop to ask why the hyenas are stealing the cupcakes. Maybe they're starving, and any time they've tried to talk to the villagers, the villagers totally shut them out. We never see either party try to talk to the other. The problem is guns, so the solution is guns. Those are your only two options.

Elephants are Not Birds and Johnny the Walrus
Now, the next ones we're going to talk about are Elephants are Not Birds and Johnny the Walrus. This one is a double feature because both of these books are about "gender ideology," and while they tackle it in slightly different ways, there's enough overlap that I decided to lump them together and break them down simultaneously.
So, Elephants are Not Birds is another one from Brave Books, and it was written by Ashley St. Clair, who was kicked out of Turning Point USA because she was photographed at an event headlined by white supremacists and neo-Nazis. 
And here's a definitely totally unrelated picture of her getting a friendly... headlock? ...by Nick Fuentes. So she was too radical for Turning Point USA. And she wrote a transphobic kids book. Great.
Anyway, this book is about Kevin the elephant, who really enjoys singing. And because he enjoys singing so much, our villain - Culture the Vulture - tells him that maybe he's really a bird, and that "only his feelings show what is real." (And yes, the villain is literally named "Culture." This isn't a metaphor. This is just... out loud.)
Well, Kevin dresses up like a bird, tries to do bird things, realizes that he doesn't enjoy being a bird - and just can't do a lot of "bird" things - so he decides to go back to being an elephant and tells off Culture for trying to lead him astray.
Similarly, we have Johnny the Walrus by Matt "I don't know what a woman is" Walsh, who you may know from his transphobic and wilfully ignorant "documentary" What is a Woman?. In this story, Johnny is a little boy who enjoys playing pretend, and when his mom takes a picture of him pretending to be a walrus, the nefarious internet people tell her that he's a real walrus.
So she takes him to the doctor, who gives him a list of things he can do to be "more walrus" - like putting on body paint, eating worms, and - potentially - getting surgery to turn his feet into fins. Johnny is clearly miserable while doing all these things, but his mom continues to make him do them because of pressure from the internet people. 
...until she takes him to the zoo to see the other walruses, and she gets a dose of common sense from the self-insert zookeeper who tells her she needs to focus on "protecting" her son, not forcing him to be a walrus. So she and human Johnny go home, happily ever after.
Both of these stories compare gender to animal species, which - similar to race analogies - just...isn't accurate. Gender is about how we think of and express ourselves. It's not what chromosomes or body parts we have. That's a whole other thing.
Species - the difference between humans and walruses, or between elephants and birds - is fundamentally biological.You can tell what species something is by its DNA. That is not true of gender. Gender is socially constructed. Species is not.
As Parrish Turner says in his article for the School Library Journal, "This [metaphor] plays into dismissive attitudes about transgender people being out of touch or even mentally ill. It is a cliché I have experienced myself, when my coming out is met with the response, `Oh, and if I say I'm a dog, I guess we are all going to accept that now?' This implies that two such assertions are the same. Yet, there is a marked difference between wanting to be another gender, considering the range and complexity of human gender, and wanting to be another species, something that is impossible. ...The one-animal-yearns-to-be-another construct, at its heart, is a misund"erstanding of what it means to be transgender. "
Or, as Dana Simpson, author of the "Phoebe and her Unicorn," series puts it: "It doesn't really work or make sense as a metaphor for being trans. I get why someone would think it did, because that's a lot of people's understanding of being trans: you're one thing but you want to be another. But that's wrong. The point of coming out as trans, at least for a lot of us, is to better express who we already are, not to become something else. Gender isn't species. It's not some objective, biologically innate thing, where becoming something else requires a magical transformation. [Gender is] just a spectrum of different ways to be the individual human you are." 
And if you want more information from even more actual trans people about this, then I have some links in the description to some videos and articles that explain things further.
But let's take a second and think about what this implies. In these books, the main characters are attempting to be something fundamentally different from what they are. They are trying to do something impossible, and we're supposed to see that as a failure.
Like in Elephants are Not Birds, Kevin tries to do a variety of "bird things" while wearing fake wings and a beak, and all the other animals give him dirty looks for trying to be something he's not. And we're meant to laugh at his silly ideas like eating seeds or fitting in a nest - of course he can't do those, he's an elephant! 
So...it follows that we're supposed to laugh at trans people. Look how funny they are, trying to be something they're not. That looks ridiculous! It's gross. And the same thing happens in Johnny the Walrus. He covers himself in paint, which looks silly, and eats worms, which...yuk. We are supposed to think being trans is gross.
The "gender = species" thing has been around for a while, but there was another metaphor in both of these books that I hadn't seen before. Both books suggest that being trans is...easy. It's like playing pretend. It's a fantasy that people latch onto just because they don't want to do the difficult thing of just sucking it up and being what they were born as, even if it's hard.
Kevin the elephant daydreams about being a bird and getting to sing songs all day, and not having to lug carts around town. If he were a bird, he wouldn't have to do any of that! And Johnny is just playing pretend, and people shouldn't take that seriously.
The implications of this are really interesting. To these people, being trans is, like...idealistic. It's a fantasy, a daydream. It's taking the easy way out. You're too weak to be a macho man? Become a woman! Is it too hard to deal with the beauty standards that come with being a woman? Just be a man instead! It's just so infantilizing and condescending.
In both of these books, culture - either literally Culture the Vulture, or The Internet People - is what convinces these kids or their parents that they should be something different from what they were born as. It doesn't come from the kids, it comes from outside.
And this really reveals what they think about trans people, right? They think that people couldn't possibly come to the conclusion that their gender is something different than what they were told it was, on their own. They think that trans people only exist because of peer pressure from society. And this...just isn't true.
And it's also...kind of sad. It shows that these people really don't trust their kids - or any kids, for that matter.  --  At the end of Elephants are Not Birds, Kevin, now an elephant again, tells Culture the Vulture that he is "most free when [he] trusts what is true." And this, on its surface, is great. Teaching kids to trust their intuition and listen to their feelings is awesome.
But that's not actually what's happening here. At the beginning of the book, Culture the Vulture convinces Kevin he's a bird by telling him "It's only your feelings that show what is real." Now, at the beginning, Kevin doesn't have the feeling that he's a bird. Culture puts that idea in his head. He just knows he likes singing.
But that aside, what is the real difference between this statement that we're supposed to disagree with and "trusting what is true"? There's this weird difference between "feelings" and what's "real" or "true." Kids are being taught not to listen to their feelings.
They need to "trust what is true," but their feelings aren't "what is true" - so...what is true? Where does truth come from? I think the folks who wrote these books would argue that truth comes from parents, the Bible, and - of course - the wonderful literary masterpieces published by Brave Books.
I just find it really insidious that they're trying to undermine kids' trust in themselves. They're teaching their kids that if they question things...they need to hide those questions. They need to blindly trust only a few select people, and deeply mistrust everyone else, including themselves, if they have concerns or questions about what they're learning.
It's just gross and sad. That's my rating. 1 star "It's just gross and sad" - Zoe Bee.
The one silver lining is that, even in the metaphor, they still fail. In Elephants are Not Birds, Culture the Vulture says that Kevin "needs" wings to be a bird. But...that's actually not true. Kiwis don't have wings. And they're...so cute. They are some of the cutest little birds. I love them.
This doesn't make the "gender = species" metaphor suddenly magically work, or anything, but it does show that even in their made-up kids' story, their transphobia is built on faulty assumptions and disproven ideas. Transphobia doesn't even make sense in the fantasies of transphobes.

Honorable Mention: Fame, Blame, and the Raft of Shame
Now, before I move on to the next section, I want to mention another book just real quick: One of the "Brave Books" I read was Fame, Blame, and the Raft of Shame, which was written by Texas state representative Dan Crenshaw.
And it's about a scourge that is absolutely taking over our schools - something that is a genuinely concerning issue among all 6-year-olds: Cancel Culture.
Anyway, the book is about a stand-up comic making a joke in bad-taste, and so they get canceled and tied to a raft and thrown up to the surface (because, oh, yeah, the city is underwater for some reason? It's an underwater city in a big glass bowl). And eventually they cancel so many people that there's too much weight on top of the glass and it begins to break and almost floods the city.
But then the protagonist stands up for the canceled people, pulls them back down, and they repair the city together. This really goes to show you just how big of a deal they think it is to be "canceled." They see themselves as these incredible martyrs that are saving the whole world from being drowned by wokeness or whatever.
It's not that good, and it's not even offensive or anything, I just think it's so funny that they take cancel culture so seriously. But that's all.
How Bad Analogies = Bad Arguments (José's section?)
Metaphors are powerful, but these kinds of moralistic analogies are still mostly consigned to fanciful stories about talking animals. But a little birdie told me that there's actually a whole wild world of conservative propaganda books for kids out there...
(little birdie? is that a bad joke? who knows)
There are so many more of these books that act like thin veneers over the most trite conservative propaganda. Traditional children's stories usually have simple morals, like why it's good to share. Conservative ones are more about explaining why feminists are awful, or how Donald Trump is some kind of awesome caveman.
And one of the most striking things I noticed in these books is how they often aren't much more sophisticated than the arguments you hear out of the average conservative pundit. Zoe and I both looked at Matt Walsh's book, and the arguments it made were about as sophisticated as the ones he puts in his transphobic movie where he annoys a bunch of academics with his inane questions.
The life lessons these books give to kids is that they should decide what the world is about at a young age, and never let those ideas or thoughts grow into something more meaningful. Basically, listen to your parents, and never question them.
And some of these books get really wild. If you thought that Dana Loesch's "Paws Off My Cannon" was rough, I highlighted one book that's all about telling kids the joys of AR-15's. And how putting a silencer and scope on a gun is like adults playing with LEGOs.
So if you want more of that, be sure to check out Jose's video, which I have linked in the description, and I can confirm - I some of the books he talks about in that video - they are fucking wild. (laugh)
Conclusion
Metaphors are important. They help us conceptualize the world and teach challenging concepts. But because they become self-fulfilling prophecies, we need to be really careful with how we use them as educational tools.
As education scholar Shawn M. Glynn puts it, "When teachers, authors, or students intentionally or inadvertently compare features that do not correspond to one another, misunderstanding and misdirection result... An analogy easily can lead students down the wrong path."
In other words, the kinds of metaphors that these kids' books peddle that I've spent the past 20 minutes exploring are inaccurate, but that makes them dangerous. When kids grow up thinking about racism or gun control or trans rights through the lenses of the metaphors that these books use, they grow up believing that systemic racism isn't real, and the US is a meritocracy, and "bad" people should be stopped with guns, and trans people are delusional and disgusting.
We need to be incredibly careful with the metaphors we use in these contexts, because, as George Lakoff puts it, "[these] political and economic metaphors can hide aspects of reality. But in the area of politics and economics, metaphors matter more, because they constrain our lives. A metaphor in a political or economic system, by virtue of what it hides, can lead to human degradation."
The metaphors in these books, by virtue of the lies they tell about racism and gun violence and trans rights, can do real damage. Now, I'm not saying all metaphors are evil or we should never use analogies, and I'm not even saying that metaphors are these ultra-powerful tools.
I'm just trying to make it clear that the language we use does have an impact on how we think about things. Like, mentally, our linguistic choices affect our cognitive frameworks, and vice versa. So we need just need to be careful.
These kids' books aren't the most heinous evil out there. But I hope that by going through them, I've helped to highlight some of the nuances that writers use to instill different ideologies. So, I guess I want to leave you with a call to be more conscientious about your metaphor usage. Keep an eye on political rhetoric that frames things as wars or describes abstract concepts in physical terms.
Because...it's more important than you think.
Outro & Patron Poem
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! This one was a lot of fun, and like I said in the video, this is really just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to metaphors and cognitive frameworks, so be sure to let me know if that sounds like something you might want me to dive into in the future. And I am still working on my video about Squeecore and my video about the American Monomyth, but I'm also moving in a few weeks, so those big videos are being nudged down the road a little bit. 
Anyway, I want to give a huge shoutout to my patrons and channel members whose names are scrolling here beside me. And an especially huge thanks to A Tasty Snack, Adam, Dylan, Justin Lowery, Robert Bradford, Science Punk Sellout, and Will Swanson. This video just wouldn't have been possible without you folks!
If you'd like to join them and get perks like getting early access to videos, joining our Patron-only discord server, or getting custom written poems just for you, then be sure to check the links in the description to see how you can become a Patron or channel member!
And finally, our patron poem of the video. For Claire Browne, here is "All snails go to heaven"

All snails go to heaven

She was an alien on the drainpipe,
spiral shell, sand-mottled and cracked,
long eyes protruding into the gloom,
tentacles smelling and feeling and searching the air.
Searching for what? I wondered.
She stretched her slime-drenched neck
back and out and out into the rain
to be baptized.

And until next time: stay safe, stay warm, and I will see y'all again soon, I hope. Bye, folks :)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grades and the Myth of Motivation | A Professor Explains 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Skit 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is Maria. She had always been a curious girl, asking her parents questions about everything around her. When she got to school, she did the same thing with her teachers. But...she found that they didn't like it very much when she asked too many questions. Other students, who were quiet, got gold stars and little tickets they could turn in at the end of the week for a toy or a piece of candy. But Maria didn't get those, and she felt left out when the other kids would play with their prizes. So...she learned to be quiet. She stopped asking questions. She kept her eyes focused on her work. She was a good student. And, eventually, she got her gold star. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
She kept this up throughout her school years, and she learned that she could get more than just gold stars and candy in exchange for her silence. If she got an A on a test, her parents would give her $10. If she got straight A's all year, they'd give her a hundred. If she could get a 4.0 GPA for her whole high school career, the local college would give her thousands. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What was that worth to Maria, a girl who'd been told over and over by her parents and teachers and coaches that a college education was what you needed to get out of your hometown, get a job, and "really make it"? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, she did what it took to get those grades. She studied and did her homework, of course. But she also had to be smart about things -- she had to prioritize. She quit the band during her sophomore year so she could fit another AP class into her schedule. She chose the projects that looked the easiest, because she couldn't risk screwing up and jeopardizing her grades. She worried herself sick -- literally sick -- before every exam, because every exam, every project, every paper, every quiz, everything was "make-or-break." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Because Maria worked so hard her grades, they started to define her; her entire sense of self-worth was based on her GPA. The A's were nice, of course, but they felt unearned -- after all, she'd crammed for them; she didn't feel like she'd actually learned anything. And anything lower than an A was a sign of personal failure and worthlessness and represented a hole nearly impossible to climb out of. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Everything was a calculation. Everything decision was based on "What is my teacher looking for? What is the right answer, and what is the path of least resistance that'll get me there?" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For Maria, the purpose of school was to figure out what your teacher wanted, and then give that to them. Teachers held grades over students' heads like pinatas...or guillotines. Give the teacher what they want, tell them what they want to hear, turn your work in on time, sit down and be quiet... Or else... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
That little girl who had asked all those questions -- who had approached life with curiosity and passion -- was gone. In her place was an anxious teenager who saw school as a barrier to her future -- or just a means to an end -- and who'd missed all the learning that was supposed to be happening there. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
School, it seems, had gotten in the way of her education.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Intro 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
No matter how many years you've been out of the education system -- or, heaven forbid, if you're still in it -- you probably have a lot of feelings about school. Regardless of whether you were a good student or a "bad student," it seems like we all have a lot of education-related baggage. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, why is that? Why is it that we all have this kind of sense that there's something wrong with our schools? Why does it seem like there's always complaints about "what they're teaching kids these days"? And why -- even after decades of education research and years of reform after reform -- do we still seem to be struggling? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What's funny is... I haven't even said what country I'm talking about. I mean, I'm obviously talking about the U.S., because I'm from the U.S., and if there's one thing you can always count on an American to do, it's to assume they're the center of attention. But seriously, other than a few outliers who seem to have a good handle on things, a lot of nations are struggling with education. By and large, we don't really know what to do about our schools. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The one good thing to come out of this universal [shrug and "I dunno" sound], is there's a lot of research out there about what to do about this problem. Now, there's a lot of fluff -- a lot of folks who just want to go back to the "good ol' days" when you could beat kids' knuckles with rulers -- but there's also...some pretty. There's a solution that's...kinda new, kinda weird, kinda...radical. But...it's also...legit. It's backed up by statistics, psychology research, education experts, and thousands of students and teachers who have been using these methods to...pretty positive results so far. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In my quest to become the greatest English professor to walk the earth, I discovered a lot of surprising and groundbreaking, and potentially paradigm-shifting ideas about education. I mean, these are ideas that challenge some of our most basic assumptions about how people learn. And then... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
There was one book -- one book that brought together dozens and dozens of studies done over decades -- that disrupted assumptions about not just schooling, but about...well...everything. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
See, our theories about the way students learn and about how teachers should teach are based on a few basic assumptions. And these assumptions are also the basis of how we run businesses, how we expect employees to act, how we interact with each other, how we raise our kids. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So if these assumptions could be proven faulty -- if it turns out what we think we know about how humans learn and behave, about human nature itself, is wrong -- then that means our entire society is built on a lie. ...or, at least a mistake. And that's worth looking at. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, let's explore this rabbit hole of human nature, from why teachers give tests to the entire framework of society, and see what we can find. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Without further ado...let's get started. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grading 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What we think it does 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Before we can dive into dissecting grades, we should probably figure out why they exist in the first place. So...what's the point of grades?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, around a hundred years ago, our modern conception of grading came about because teachers wanted a uniform and consistent way of measuring student learning. They wanted to be able to make it crystal clear what kinds of learning a student had reached, and what kinds of learning they still needed to work on. And this sounds great, right? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Except the first widespread attempt to standardize grades ended up with the bell curve, and if any of you have been in a class that grades on a curve -- with a professor who says only 10% of you can get A's, and the average grade is a C -- then you know why this isn't a great idea. Now, we'll talk about exactly why it's a bad idea a little later on in the video, but suffice it to say -- it's not good. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Luckily, most teachers soon realized that grading on a curve wasn't a great way to do things, so they moved to grading students individually instead of as compared to their classmates, but they still used these individual grades to rank their students. After all, if grades are a clear and objective measurement of how much a student knows, or what level of mastery they have, then it just makes sense to figure out who knows the most stuff, right? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Teachers also use grades as a communication tool. Grades communicate to parents and students about how students are doing in a certain class or how well they've grasped a certain concept. Grades measure how much you've learned, and that's an important measurement to have. If the goal of school is to learn things, it's good to know how close you actually are to that goal. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And from this, grades also work as a motivator. If you don't want to get a bad grade on your test, then you're motivated to study for it. If you get cash from your parents or free movie tickets from your school for being on the Honor Roll, then you're motivated to do all your work and really commit to learning. If you want to get an A in a class, you're motivated to do whatever the teacher tells you to do. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And if you really want to get an A, then you'll do whatever it takes. You'll do anything. Anything. And that's why teachers give grades. �� 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What it actually does 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So teachers and administrators -- and even parents, to some extent -- think that grades are these really helpful tools that measure our learning, communicate that measurement to us, and then work to motivate us to do the stuff we need to do to succeed in school. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But, as I'm sure most of us can attest, it doesn't really feel that way to students. I mean, imagine you've written a paper, and when you get it back, you see "B" on the top. What does this communicate to you? Does it mean you have great ideas, but your organization could use work? Or maybe your organization was fine, but you had a weak thesis statement and had a few comma-splices. Or maybe it was a perfect paper, but you just turned it in a few days late. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is even the case for more "objective" subjects, like math. If you've taken an algebra test, and you see you have a "B+" what does that mean? Does it mean you know all the concepts, but just made a couple arithmetic errors? Does it mean you understand most of the concepts, but it's just one type of question that really throws you off? Does it mean you actually understand everything, but you didn't eat breakfast that morning, or you were distracted during the test because you had a headache, or you didn't get enough sleep because you had to stay up late to write your English paper (or you had the late shift at your job...or you were taking care of a sick family member...)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And even if you had comments on your test explaining exactly what you did well and what you needed to improve on, research shows that if a paper has comments and a grade, most students skip right by comments and focus only on the grade. When something is graded, the feedback is ignored. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
All of this is to say that grades don't take everything into account. And as students, we know this. We intuitively feel that grades don't accurately measure what we know, much less who we are as human beings. And even if all of these things were normalized and accounted for, there is still difference between what different instructors think constitutes "A" level work. I mean, you know which teachers are the "easy graders" at your school, right? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And it wouldn't really matter if grades were this inaccurate if they were just a simple number only you, your teacher, and maybe your parents ever saw, if they were this "communication device" that teachers want them to be. But they aren't. For our entire academic careers, we're told over and over and over how important grades are. We're sorted and ranked based on our grades. Grades determine our future. They dictate which colleges we get into, what kinds of scholarships we get (if any), which companies will hire us. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grades are important, and as students we are all too aware of this. So, we do everything we can to keep that GPA up. We take classes from the easy graders. We choose the easier topics for our projects. We avoid challenges, even though challenges are what actually promotes learning. We avoid risk, because failure -- even if "failure" just means getting a "B" -- is really hard to recover from. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And remember, grades don't actually evaluate our learning in a consistent and useful way -- so we're doing all this just to get an arbitrary number that doesn't actually measure anything real. That's not right, right? There's something wrong with this...right? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We're told that we need to learn from our mistakes, but how can we risk making mistakes when everything is on the line? We're told failure is good -- it's a learning experience -- but we're punished for it. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grades are meant to measure learning, communicate that measurement, and then motivate us to do better in school. Intuitively, we know grades aren't actually good measures of learning. We know they don't really communicate anything to us. So...what about motivation? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, grades certainly feel like motivators. Like I explained earlier, we're willing to do pretty much anything for a good grade, and bad grades are terrifying, and so we'll do pretty much anything to avoid them. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But is this...good? I mean, is this actually doing anything for our learning? If the purpose of schools is to help us learn stuff, are grades actually motivating us to do that? Or are they just motivating us to get good grades? (And remember, grades don't actually indicate learning.) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
To most students, grades don't feel so much like achievements of how much we've grown and learned and accomplished. Good grades feel like carrots on sticks, dangled in front of us by teachers. Bad grades feel like guns pointed at our heads until we do our work quickly and quietly and behave ourselves and sit down and shut up. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Even if grades did measure learning -- even if we found a way to accurately assess learning and then turned that into a "grade" -- the "motivation" they provide (the carrot on the stick and the gun to our heads) wouldn't actually increase our learning. In fact, grades actively hinder learning. External
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
motivation -- for anything -- actually makes things worse. And this is because everything we think we know about motivation...is wrong. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Motivation 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
How do we think it works? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alright, let's take a step back. What do we "think" we know about motivation? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, just take a look at any weight-loss program or pay-on-commission job: If people are given an incentive to do something -- a sum of money for losing a certain amount of weight; a bonus for selling a particular number of products -- they will be more likely to do that thing. If your toddler is throwing a tantrum in the middle of a store, you promise them a lollipop for being quiet. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is based on the psychological theory of "behaviorism." In Behaviorism, people are collections of behaviors, and we decide which behaviors to engage in based on what will grant us the greatest rewards, and we avoid behaviors that would grant us punishments. Think of it as "Do this, get that." We are nice to people because we want them to be nice to us. We don't break the law because we don't want to go to prison. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Now, as a culture, we've internalized this "Do this, get that" idea, and we've applied it to pretty much everything. If people are good and smart and innovative, they will succeed. If they fail, it's because they must have done something wrong. The harder you work, the more you get -- that's why doctors and lawyers and other people who we see as doing hard work that they've invested a lot of time and energy into are seen as more deserving of higher pay. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We see this as the natural way of things. Intuitively, it makes sense. Do this, get that. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But what happens when the "this" and "that" are being determined by someone else? What happens when the idea of rewarding behaviors turns into "motivating" behaviors? When you use rewards to coerce behaviors? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well this is exactly what's happening in our schools. We're telling students "Do this (study hard, come to class on time, turn things in on time, sit down, be quiet), and you'll get that (an A, a gold star, the honor roll). Teachers are using grades as motivators because -- as a society -- we assume this is just...how human brains work. We are told we'll get X for doing Y, so we do Y because we want X. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And teachers and managers and parents all do this because they want us to keep doing the behavior. Teachers include attendance and participation in their grade calculations because they want us to come to class and participate. Managers give hard workers bonuses because they want them to keep working hard. Parents give their children an allowance for doing chores because they want them to help out around the house and develop a good work ethic. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And if we agree with the foundations of behaviorism, then all these things are right. Rewarding behavior helps you get more of that behavior. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
...right? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, you've seen the title of this video, you know what my conclusion is, you know what's coming, so let's just get into it, shall we?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Why doesn't it work this way? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alright, so why is motivation a myth? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, motivation itself isn't a myth. Motivation exists. But the idea that we can extrinsically motivate people into becoming better, smarter, harder-working people is. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have this belief that rewarding people for performing a behavior means they will perform that behavior more and better. Rewards motivate people to do things. If you give someone a bonus for selling the most staplers, people will sell more staplers. If you give students bonus points for drawing a nice picture, they'll put more effort into their drawings. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We assume that people need to be rewarded to do work, or at least to do good work. People wouldn't do work unless they were given a reward to do it, right? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, decades of research suggests otherwise. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Study after study after study shows that if you reward someone for performing a task -- whether it's solving puzzles, drawing pictures, remembering words, writing headlines, doing math problems, tutoring other students, or taking standardized tests -- they do worse. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The participants who were rewarded, consistently made more mistakes, were less creative, performed their tasks slower, and were even more irritable. Even if the rewards came after the task, as a surprise, any subsequent tasks the participants performed were done worse than that initial time when they didn't know they were going to be rewarded. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So...why is this? Why doesn't extrinsic motivation work the way we think it should? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, there's a few reasons. One is that when we associate a behavior with a reward, instead of making the behavior seem more attractive, it actually devalues the reward. I mean, if someone has to give you something extra to do a task, that must mean the task itself has no inherent value, right? So being paid -- or getting a gold star or an "A" -- for performing a task actually makes that task seem not worth doing unless you're getting paid to do it. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is why grading doesn't work. Because, in theory, we want our students to see learning as an inherently good thing. We want them to be curious, to see the value in their education. But then we tell them "Oh, well, I'll give you this grade for doing this work." So then they focus on the grade, not the learning. The learning becomes less valuable in itself. It's just a means to an end. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So when we're extrinsically motivated to do a task, we don't actually care about the task itself anymore. All we care about is the reward. Why would we spend more time and energy working on something? All we need to do is the bare minimum in order to get the reward, so why would we try any harder than necessary? Why would we take risks? I mean, screwing up would mean we wouldn't get anything, so why not just play it safe? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Once a behavior loses its inherent value -- whether it's working, learning, or acting a certain way -- then we require rewards to even have any interest in doing it anymore. And this is why rewards don't work in the long-term. If you reward someone for something, they're only going to do that thing as long as they are rewarded for it. So, if you want a behavior to continue in the long term, you have to keep increasing 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
the rewards. Because if the only reason people are doing something is because of the reward, then the moment you take away the reward, they have no reason to keep doing the task.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Now, I think this is a good time to point out that I'm not talking about just being paid for doing work. I'm talking about things like bonuses, commission pay, and other workplace rewards. The thing about money, that differentiates it from grades and rewards in general, is that we need it to survive. And just getting to live isn't a reward. Now...that's a whole other issue for a whole other video, but, suffice it to say, for the time being, we require money to live. But, as it relates to motivation, more money doesn't necessarily equal more motivation to work. Being paid more is...diminishing returns. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Think of it like...vitamins. So, our body needs a certain amount of vitamins (money) to survive. We have to meet that minimum, or our body will shut down. And we should get more than that minimum -- it's technically all we need, but in order to actually be healthy, we need a lot more. That being said, we also have a maximum that our body can even process. And anything more than that maximum just...gets flushed out. Literally. We pee it out. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
It's the same with money. We will do a job for pay because we need some amount of money to survive. Now, some jobs don't pay enough to live, and those are bad and shouldn't exist. If you eat foods that don't contribute very many vitamins or minerals...those are junk foods. If there's a job that doesn't give you enough money to live...that's a junk job. But eating healthy foods and then downing a whole bunch of multivitamins...you're just going to pee out all the extra vitamins. And...if you hate your job -- if it doesn't spark any intrinsic motivation -- getting a bonus that takes your pay from 100k to 150k isn't necessarily going to make that big of a difference. You're still going to hate your job. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
More money doesn't necessarily equal more motivation. You can be paid too little to want to do a job, but there's no maximum sum that will suddenly make you enjoy a job you hate. You would only be doing it for the money. The money doesn't magically make the job itself enjoyable. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The final problem with extrinsic motivation is that it's about control. I mean, it's in the name: extrinsic. There's some external force that is coercing you into doing something. As we've seen, rewards don't actually produce better work...they produce obedience. Think about it. We're given A's and gold stars for turning our work in on time, for listening to the teacher, for doing the things that the standardized tests test for, for sitting down and shutting up. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The thing about rewards -- about behaviorism as a concept -- is that it's about control. It's about giving someone something for performing a certain behavior. That is control. That is coercion. That is manipulation. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And that's what grades are doing to us. Grades are the school system's way of controlling the behavior of its students. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But it's not just grades, either. It's everything. It's how we're taught in schools, but it's also how we raise our kids and how we're treated at our jobs, and how we stop smoking or motivate ourselves to exercise. It's everywhere. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And this is part of why rewards have stuck around for so long. We, as a culture, are addicted to them. We see students who won't do work unless they're graded for it; we see people who won't go the extra mile or be more creative with their work, and we think "People are lazy." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But, in reality, we're seeing people who are addicted to rewards because everything about our society is built on them. The problem isn't the people...it's how they're treated.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Solution 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alright, so if rewards don't work to motivate people...what do we do? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, it depends on what your goal is. If what you want is to create an army of obedient yes-men who don't think creatively and just do what they're told, then sure, you can keep doing things the way you're doing them. Keep using rewards. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But if you want curious, motivated critical thinkers, the solution isn't to give them more rewards. The solution isn't for us to do anything. Because if we see it as "We need to do something to get them to behave a certain way," then we're still thinking about it all wrong. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nothing we do externally will work. Extrinsic motivation -- motivation that comes from an outside source -- will never work as a long-term solution to the problem. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The solution has to come from inside. Not extrinsic motivation...but intrinsic motivation. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, I keep bringing up this idea that our society believes "People are lazy." People won't do things unless they're motivated to, and the way we traditionally motivate people is by using external rewards. But the thing is...people aren't inherently lazy. People don't want to just...do nothing. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Human nature is to be curious, to figure out the world, to be creative, to feel productive, to help the people around us. In a vacuum, those are the behaviors we are drawn toward. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So how do we get people to do those things in "real life"? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, first we need to get something out of the way: Whenever the idea of removing rewards -- whether it's grades or different parenting methods -- comes up, people are quick to say "Well...what...so we just do nothing? We just let them run wild and do whatever they want?" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is a false dichotomy. And it comes from the assumption that we only have two options: We punish people, or we reward people. That's it. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But really, punishments and rewards are basically the same thing -- they are both manipulative tactics that work from the assumptions of behaviorism. So now we have extrinsic motivators: punishments-and-rewards or...intrinsic motivators. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So...if extrinsic motivation is about control...intrinsic motivation is the opposite -- it's about freedom. Fixing Schools 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our schools are not set up for freedom. Public schools in the U.S. were built to be funnels to the workplace; they were built to be little factories that pumped out little obedient workers that could help us defeat Communism. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And sure -- that's one theory of education. But today, I'm sure most of us are more interested in having schools that help our children grow into responsible, creative, problem-solving critical thinkers who know how to read and write and do math and stuff. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But the way our schools are set up isn't really conducive to that. We're still using our old factory model, a model that's based on old, outdated theories of how learning works. Most of us think of learning as being
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
like...pouring a jug of water into a bowl. The students' heads are the bowls, the water is education, and the teacher is the jug. But that's not actually how it works. Knowledge isn't some external, objective thing. It's constructed. Knowledge and learning are things that we create together. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And I know that this all sounds kind of heady and abstract, but basically...in order for us to deeply understand something, we need to discover it for ourselves. And just being told facts doesn't really count as discovery. Instead, we need to be gently prompted to ask questions, guided through finding our own solutions, helped through our inevitable mistakes, offered feedback, and...supported when we finally succeed. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So what does this mean on a practical level? Like, what does this actually look like in the classroom? Well, it means the teacher isn't just standing at the front, with all eyes on them, lecturing at half-awake teenagers for 50 minutes at a time. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
It means that we need to cultivate three things: Collaboration, Content, and Choice. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We need our learning to be collaborative. We need students to work together, not be in competition with one another. Have them solve problems together, talk to each other about what they're learning, help each other through their struggles. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Working collaboratively is how most of us work in our day-to-day lives. Most of us aren't working all by ourselves in a vacuum. That's not how our world works. So we have to learn to work together. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We need to make the content engaging. One of the easiest ways to do this is to make sure whatever you're teaching can somehow be connecting to the student's lives. Have them practice rhetorical skills by making memes; have them engage with history by making a modernized version of past political campaigns; have them learn area and volume by building and measuring structures in Minecraft. The only way students will give a shit about what they're learning is if they have a reason to give a shit. Make your content exciting, engaging, relevant. Basically -- make sure your content is contextualized; make it connect to the real lives of your real-life, real-human students. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And yeah, that's hard. It means you can't just lecture and then give a multiple-choice test. But that's what teaching is about. It's about figuring out what your students need, in order to be able to learn, and then doing it. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And finally...choice. This is the scary one. Because it means giving students real choice, real independence, real power in the classroom. It means letting students decide for themselves what they want to get out of their education, what they want to learn, how they want to learn, how they want to be assessed. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
It means not always having every single assignment planned out and ready to go -- because students need to have input on the assignments. They need to be able to say "What if we made a video instead of writing an essay?" and then you ask them to defend their position, ask them about how that will help them meet their learning goals, and what kind of things the video would need to have to be a success, and then -- if they can do that -- you let them do it. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And, yes, that means that the teacher loses some control of the classroom. But it means students gain independence, freedom, choice, and space to be curious and creative. It gives them a chance to be humans.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(Oh, and I didn't really get a chance to say this anywhere else in the video, so I'm going to put it here, but this kind of thing also helps with plagiarism. Teachers who just use pre-built or decades-old assignments -- or assignments that can be found online from open-source textbooks...and they don't change anything about the assignment or anything---- THAT IS HOW PLAGIARISM HAPPENS. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you change up your assignments and make good assignments that your students can't just look up online THEN THEY CAN'T PLAGIARIZE. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is something that really pisses me off -- like, yeah, no shit, if you make grades the most important thing, and then use assignments that can literally be found online with the simplest Google search, YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE STUDENTS PLAGIARIZE. If you don't want plagiarism, you need to work harder and make better assignments and give students a reason to care about their work. It's that simple.) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Debunking 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, before I move on, I want to address several of the arguments that I can already hear you shouting at the screen. There are lots of valid questions about the pragmatics of actually implementing this kind of thing in our classrooms, so I want to cover them as best as I can. So...here goes. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But Zoe! If I don't grade attendance, then my students won't come to class! 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
That means your class isn't interesting or engaging enough. Your job as a teacher is to make your class worth coming to. And teachers who have removed attendance grades say that there has been little -- if any -- effect on student attendance. And...you should think about why you want to reward your students for coming to class in the first place. If attendance is graded, doesn't that mean your students are rewarded for coming in when they're sick? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But Zoe! If I don't give my high schoolers grades, then they won't get accepted to college! 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Not true. There are plenty of schools that don't grade their students that have great college acceptance rates. Also, think about what you'd be doing for your students instead: What means more to a college...a list of letters, or an actual letter written by the student's teacher or counselor that says "Hey, we don't grade at our school, so let's tell you about this student. This is what this student did while at our school; here are the major projects they worked on; here is what they excelled at; here is who they are as a human." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
That information is way more valuable than a handful of A's or B's. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But Zoe! How will students (and their parents) know how well they are doing in class? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Like I said earlier, it's not about just getting rid of grades and then doing everything else the same. That would never work. What you need to do is replace grades with other, actually valuable feedback. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Write comments, have meetings, give substantial feedback. Talk to your students which concepts they have done well with and which ones they have struggled with. Talk to them. Write to them. Have conversations with them. Yeah, it's harder and takes more time, but it's what will actually help your students learn. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But Zoe! How will we determine students' mastery of material?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
There are lots of ways! But all of them come down to giving students control over their learning. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
One popular option is contract grading -- you and the student come up with a "contract" for grades. Together, either with individual students, or together as a class, you decide "Okay, this is what `A' work looks like, this is what `B' work looks like," and so on. And then students can decide for themselves which level they want to strive for. If a student knows that they have other classes that are higher priority, then they can do "B" level work -- as long as they do what the contract says they need to do to get a B, you will give them a B at the end of the semester. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another option is to let students make their own rubrics -- they decide what they think they should accomplish as part of a particular assignment or project, and if they do that, they pass. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ultimately, let your students be a part of the assessment process. If you want them to "own their learning" then let them own it. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But Zoe! Are you saying you'd be comfortable if your brain surgeon went to a gradeless school? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Most major med schools do pass-fail systems. And, for those that don't, data shows that when you compare doctors who got high grades and doctors who got lower grades, in actual practice, they do the same. (Which also suggests that grades are...meaningless? If they don't actually indicate quality of practice outside of school?) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But Zoe! Isn't this system more prone to teacher bias? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nope! Not if it's done well! Remember, we need to be giving our students freedom and control. If they decide what their learning goals are and they decide how to get there, and you just help them get there, then you're just a guide. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But Zoe! Won't my students just all give themselves A's? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So...this is something that could happen. It's not very likely -- most students are honest with themselves and with their teachers. If anything, they are more likely to deflate their grades -- to give themselves lower grades than you think they should get. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But this is one case where you as the teacher can step in and be the final arbiter. But even if you do change their grade, you need to tell the student why. Because, at the end of the day, they need to understand what they did poorly, what they still have to learn, and what they have mastered. And they can only figure that out through a conversation. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fixing...Everything Else... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Now, clearly schools aren't the only problem here. Like I said earlier, this isn't just a video about grades -- it's a video about the entire concept of rewards. And everything -- or nearly everything -- in our society is set up to function within this reward-based system. So... There's a lot of work to be done. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our workplaces are facing the same kinds of motivation issues that our schools are facing. As I was writing this script, there was a meme going around of a business that complained that "No one wanted to work" and apparently it was more than a meme -- it was a real phenomenon at businesses across the nation.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And the thing is... People don't want to work at these businesses because they a) aren't being paid enough to live, and b) aren't intrinsically motivated to work there. And those are kind of the two prerequisites to having happy workers. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So you need to pay people a living wage, and then help employees find intrinsic motivation. And that intrinsic motivation comes from the same three things that I mentioned above: Collaboration, Content, and Choice. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Let workers work together; let them help each other. And, if you're a manager, that includes you, too. You better work together and be an equal with your employees. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Let people do work that actually makes a difference. Let them do work that they enjoy. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And let them have choices in how they complete their job. Let them choose their hours. Let them have a say in the decisions being made in the office, or in policy changes. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And you might say "Well, what about the jobs that suck? No one would do those unless they were rewarded for it (or forced to do it)." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"One sociologist, studying a group of garbage collectors in San Francisco, discovered that most of them were quite satisfied with their work because of the way it  --  and the company  --  was organized. Relationships among the men were highlighted, tasks and routes were "varied enough to break the monotony of the work's routine," and the company was set up as a cooperative, meaning that each worker owned a share of the business and felt a "pride of ownership."" (191) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"Okay," you might say, "but what about the jobs that really suck? Like working in fast food or being an Amazon delivery driver?" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This section continues... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"The radical response to this problem is to question the necessity of making people do wretched work in the first place. It would seem that some tasks that are even more disagreeable than garbage collection simply cannot be avoided. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But what interests me are the unpleasant jobs that do not have to be done in order for society to function, those whose existence reflects the premise of our economic system that if something sells, it has value by definition and should be produced. Should convenience foods or luxury appliances be made available if the human costs of preparing or assembling them are severe? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our answer may be yes, but the question needs to be asked. If the issue is rarely addressed, it is partly because many people are forced to choose between working at such jobs and not working at all  --  a choice framed not by "life" but by our economic system. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
These people are expected to be grateful that any employment is available, regardless of the psychic and physical toll of doing such work. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
What it comes down to is this: we who benefit from someone else's mindnumbing labor  --  we who defrost our frozen dinners (or we who order our Amazon packages with One-Day
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
shipping...) without ever considering what life is like for those invisible others who spend eight grueling, repetitive hours a day preparing them  -- " 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"are quick to say such work must be done. From one perspective, this reflects another facet of the sharp division between the haves and the havenots; the latter are left with the work that lacks interest. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
From another perspective, it could be said that what we collectively gain as consumers we lose as producers: our shelves are full of goods, while our lives are empty of meaningful work. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The central point, though, is that in any responsible discussion of intrinsic motivation, and especially of the role played by the content of tasks, we must remind ourselves of the social context. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If work is to be improved, it must first be made bearable for those who endure injuries of body, mind, and spirit for our convenience." (192) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Does that answer your question? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ultimately, what it comes down to is this: Grades do not do what we think they do; they don't accurately measure and communicate learning, and they don't motivate students. Grades -- like all rewards -- actually demotivate students and hinder the learning process. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you want your students to engage with material, if you want them to grow to be curious and critical thinkers, then you have to get rid of grades. You have to communicate with them. You have to relinquish your control. You have to give your students freedom and trust them. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
You are not their master, their controller, their interrogator holding a gun to their head. You are their guide. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Until we as a society understand the dangers of rewards on a wider scale, things aren't going to change. I framed this video around the issue of grading because it is one of those things that we can change on a grassroots level. Teachers can start this movement. And we must, if we want to end up with a more equitable society full of critical thinkers and curious, motivated, passionate people. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But we also need to work towards these goals in other areas. All of the things I mentioned about students is true of workers, too. Workers need to be given more freedom, more power, more choice. Let workers choose their hours, let them be creative with how they solve problems, and for the love of God, pay them a livable wage. Like I said earlier, the whole "more pay doesn't equal more motivation" thing only applies when people are making enough money to live, in the first place. You gotta pay people enough to live. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In this country, we say we care a lot about democracy. But then, if we look at our schools or our workplaces, that democracy is nonexistent. In our schools and our workplaces, we work under a system of ultimate, unquestionable control -- and it's making us miserable and less creative, and it's making us lose all the joy and motivation from our lives. This. is. unsustainable. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And you might say that what I'm suggesting feels like it goes against the foundations of our society. And yeah...it kinda does. But that's because the foundations of our society are bad science -- bad science that dehumanizes and demeans and demotivates everyone.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I want things to change because I want things to be better. And, to quote Alfie Kohn, "if we are committed to [making things better] we may find ourselves calling into question our most fundamental (and least examined) institutions." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the end, if there is one concept that I want you to take from this video, it's that human nature isn't laziness or selfishness. That is a lie that has been perpetuated by our constant use of rewards; rewards breed laziness and selfishness. If we get rid of the rewards, we will start to see what we are truly capable of. We will be free to be curious, free to pursue our passions, free to do the work that needs to be done because we care about our society. Humans are social. We care about each other. We want to help each other and create things and grow and learn. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The world has just convinced us otherwise. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
End Crawl 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thank you all for sticking around to the end of the video! This one was...a big one... so if you liked it, be sure to like and comment and subscribe and ring the bell and do all the YouTube stuff. You know what to do  -  you've been here before. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you are watching this live, then right after this video is over, I'm going to be heading over to Twitch to do a livestream where we'll hang out, chat, and I'll play some Baldur's Gate. So go ahead and come over there after this premiere is over. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And if you're watching this after the fact...well I'm probably not live, but come follow me on Twitch -- I'm getting into streaming and it is so much fun, I do writing and Q&A's and play games, and we just have a great time together. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Anyway, I do have a big announcement: We have merch! As I'm sure you may have noticed, my hoodie has my little sign-off on it, along with a little orange kitty cat. Now, this comes in a couple styles, and they're all pretty simple, and they don't, like shout my channel name or anything. They're just little positive messages with my signature orange cat. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you like the look of any of these, you can go to zoebee.store to check them out, and I'll have a link in the description for that, as well. And I've done my best to keep the markup as low as I can because this isn't about making a bunch of money or building a brand or whatever. It's just a creative outlet and a way to spread a positive little message and also get my cats on some shirts. So, like I said, that's zoebee.store, and let me know what you think! 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I also want to give a huge thank-you to my Patrons, whose names you should see scrolling here next to me. They are the only reason I can afford to do the things I do and buy all the books and continue to feed my pets. An especially big thank-you to my Eldritch Abominations Zowber, Sigwa, Ryan, A Tasty Snack, and Comrade Fox. And also to my new...ish Necromancer patron Dingus, who has been very patiently awaiting their poem. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Well, for you Dingus, here is... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[INSERT POEM HERE] 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you enjoyed that and would like to have your own poems written for you, or if you want to join our Discord server or just come hang out with a bunch of cool cats, come join us on Patreon, which is linked in the description.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And, until next time... 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Stay safe, stay warm, and I'll see y'all again soon, I hope. Bye folks �� 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sources 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schinske, Jeffrey, and Kimberly Tanner. "Teaching more by grading less (or differently)." CBE -- Life Sciences Education 13.2 (2014): 159-166. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Key / Notes: 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Highlighted Yellow: Put as text on screen (or, if not it exactly, something similar  -  whatever you feel works best) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Highlighted Light Blue: Little images for art 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Highlighted Green: I have a source, I just need to find it. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The vibes of this video, according to my little brother who helped me develop this script: "You're like a leftist PragerU"
The Case Against Grammarly
Intro
Grammar is one of those fun topics that people either absolutely love or absolutely hate. 
Grammar is the set of rules that holds our language together. And, as with any set of rules, there has sprung up a variety of interpretations as to what is right or wrong, and if there even is such a thing as "right and wrong" when it comes to how we use language. Even if you don't think that you're really interested in grammar, chances are you have some opinion on whether "irregardless" is a word, the use of "they" as a singular pronoun, or the almighty Oxford Comma.
All that to say...grammar is complicated. Writing is complicated. Language is complicated.
And if humans are good at anything, it's taking complicated problems and creating equally complicated tools to solve them.
One tool that we've created to help with our complicated language problem is "Grammarly," which is the subject of this video and of many, many, many YouTube ads.
(PLAY AD HERE)
While it started as a simple spelling and grammar-checking tool, Grammarly has become a one-stop-shop for helping you polish your writing. They purport to fix grammar mistakes, make your writing more clear, and even help you change the tone of your writing.
And honestly...this sounds great. As a writing teacher, I'd love to see more people write...more...better. 
But...can Grammarly actually deliver on this? Can it make our writing better? And if it can...does having better writing actually mean that we are better writers? And even if it does, is it a good thing to have an external, AI-controlle d tool that tells us what's right and wrong?
Well...let's find out.
Why Grammarly Sucks 
The promises of Grammarly are pretty hefty. They promise to make your writing "polished" and "error-free," (SCREENSHOT 9) to ensure all your punctuation marks are used correctly (SCREENSHOT 10), and to make sure you end up with "flawless text that will impress your readers" (SCREENSHOT 11). They even say that, with their tool, you will "build [your] writing skills" as you fix your mistakes. (SCREENSHOT 11).
The thing is...these promises aren't kept. And, to be fair, this isn't Grammarly's fault. Beca use keeping these promises isn't really even possible.

See, there's this thing called "rhetorical grammar," which, put simply, is when the purpose, audience, and content of your writing change how you use grammar in that writing. 
Now I know that this sounds boring as hell, but it's actually really interesting.
Consider these two sentences:
   1.    I ate the cake.
   2.    The cake was eaten.
The same thing happens in each sentence. But by phrasing things differently, you get something different out of it. In the first one, I am doing something - I am the actor, I have some kind of effect on the world around me. In the second one...something happens, and there isn't really a driving force behind it. Sure the cake was eaten, but no blame can be placed on any party.
Now, this seems pretty harmless, right? Well...let's look at another example:
   1.    An unarmed suspect was killed in an officer-involved shooting.
   2.    A police officer shot and killed an unarmed suspect.
Just like with the previous example, one sentence gives blame, and the other doesn't. In one case, you could even blame the victim for being shot. They are the only actor in that sentence, after all. 
All this is to say that while two sentences can be grammatically correct and technically equivalent, we get a different meaning from them depending on which construction we use. 
Grammarly doesn't really take this into account. I mean, it can't. In fact, it defaults to always preferring the active voice sentence (that is, the sentence where there is an actor who does an action). Grammarly will always say that the passive voice sentence ("The cake was eaten") is incorrect and should be changed.
But passive voice isn't wrong. It is a perfectly fine and valid stylistic choice. It shouldn't be relied on, and it's easy to overuse, but it is not wrong. 

In fact, many of the things that Grammarly marks as incorrect just...aren't. They are stylistic choices that can fundamentally change the meaning of a sentence.
One concept that Grammarly commonly inappropriately flags is "wordiness." Here are some examples from my own writing - these are excerpts from my Masters thesis - where the suggestions were, just...not good.
Verb tenses are not perfectly equal. Saying "Instructors are facing lower levels of engagement" does not mean the exact same thing as "Instructors face lower levels of engagement." The former implies that this is an ongoing problem. It is dynamic. The latter is static. It just is. My point was to show that lower levels of engagement can be changed, which is why I went with the dynamic wording. (SCREENSHOT 2)
Another thing Grammarly likes to point out is synonyms - they absolutely love telling you that a particular word is overused and that you should change it. But there is no such thing as a "perfect synonym." Connotation - the little tonal differences between synonyms - is important. And Grammarly just...kind of ignores that? Like here (SCREENSHOT 8), where they want me to change "academic" to "literary." Yeah, in some contexts, these words can be interchangeable. But not this one, Grammarly. No.
Even with some of the simpler things, like spelling, Grammarly isn't perfect. Here, I was talking about the composing process - composing, like writing. And they wanted me to change it to "composting." Like shit. (SCREENSHOT 5)

Now, all of these examples are indicative of a bigger problem with Grammarly. See, I am an English professor and a professional writer. I do writing and teach people how to write, for a living. I'm not infallible, but I know my stuff. And...I am able to tell where Grammarly is wrong. I know the difference between their good advice and their bad advice.
And they do offer some good advice. There are some grammar issues that they found in my writing that I missed. There were some tonal and stylistic changes that they suggested that I would implement.
But they also offered bad advice. A lot of bad advice. And not just "No, that suggestion isn't quite the tone I'm going for," but stuff that was straight-up wrong. 
And I could tell that it was wrong. Because I've studied this stuff for my whole life.
But for most people - especially Grammarly's main consumer base of college students and working professionals who lack confidence in their writing - they don't know how to tell when advice is good or bad. They trust the program to tell them what is right and wrong. 
And they shouldn't. Because Grammarly is far from perfect.

Not only is Grammarly's advice sometimes - just - wrong, but it also illuminates a larger issue here: Even if all its suggestions were correct, would that actually make us better writers?
Well...not really, no.
Like, imagine you were given the problem eleven minus two. And you got "9" because if you add the letters in both numbers together, you get 9. You happened to get the right answer, but you don't actually know the math. If you stumble into the correct answer, with no idea how you got there, you don't actually know the answer. You can't replicate it. You haven't actually learned anything.
The same thing is happening with Grammarly. You trust the program to tell you what is correct or incorrect, and so when it points out errors and gives suggestions, you accept it all at face value. Then, when you get your paper back with a good grade, you assume that everything was correct, but you never actually learned why your grammar mistakes were mistakes or why the "corrections" are correct. 
The thing about learning grammar is that it's actually really counter-productive to just ha ve our errors pointed out to us. This is something Grammarly actually does a little better than teachers, though. Teachers will often just circle or underline something that is "incorrect," but Grammarly also gives you an explanation for why something is wrong. This is a good thing.  
What is not good, though, is their claim that this can help you learn grammatical concepts. It can't. Maybe if you spend a lot of time reading through every comment and considering things with depth and curiosity, but... Grammarly is marketed toward people who are busy and don't have the time to relearn things on theWir own. So...their customer base is...not super likely to actually sit down and slowly and methodically sift through every single comment in order to gain a deeper understanding of...comma splices.
Now, I know that some of you might be thinking, "Well, if your writing is good and correct, isn't that all that matters?" And to that I say...well, it's complicated.
Producing a "good" text isn't the only thing that makes you a "good" writer. First of all, "good" is complex and dependent on context, and second of all, being a writer isn't just about the stuff you write. It's about you and your skill and your knowledge and your thought process and your passion. You are more than just the stuff you write.

By far my biggest issue with Grammarly, though...is the fact that it even exists. It's existence is predicated on the assumption that there are "right and wrong" answers to language questions. But...very often, there aren't. Language is fluid, things change, and grammar is...squishy.
Who even decides which things are mistakes to begin with? Seri ously, what authority is there? If language is a communication device, then as long as you can communicate successfully, why should there be any other metrics of "correctness"? What is "correct" in one context could be completely wrong in another. Why is Grammarly the authority on what is right or wrong in a given context?
And what kind of assumptions about language is Grammarly making? There are countless varieties of English - whose is the "correct" one? If I wrote in my home version of English - if I were writing an email to a friend who was also fluent in my dialect - and then this program (a program designed to be "correct") told me I was wrong.... That could really screw a person up. 
There is historical evidence for the real, genuine harm that it can do to a person to be told that their home dialect is wrong or broken. It hurts people. It hinders their learning. It changes how they are seen by society.
Language is complex. And Grammarly ignores that complexity when they focus on "right" and "wrong."
One of the most important things about language is how it evolves. And that kind of evolution is a necessary thing, too. Without change and growth and - yes - the shedding of useless and outdated grammar rules, a language becomes lifeless. And if there is an AI tool that is trying to determine how our language evolves (or stays stagnant), then maybe we should shed it, too.
After all, we are the humans who actually speak and write with the English language. So shouldn't we be the ones who decide its fate?
Conclusion
I don't hate Grammarly. In fact, I kind of like it. But I think that I am the audience that it should be used by. If you are already familiar with grammar rules and comfortable and confident in your writing, but you just want something that can help you with polishing your writing, Grammarly is the perfect tool for you. If you can tell the difference between good advice and bad advice, then Grammarly is great.
What Grammarly is not great at is helping people who struggle with grammar or spelling or tone: people who are not experts in English who can't tell the difference between good advice and bad advice. 
For these people, Grammarly just gives them a false and unfounded sense of confidence i n their writing. Yes, Grammarly can help. But it can also make things worse. And, even worse, it can prevent you from actually learning about language at all.
In short, it does all the hard work for you, doesn't even do it accurately, and convinces you that you couldn't be a good writer without it. All while it takes your money (if you are using the premium version). Unless you're already an expert, Grammarly does you more harm than good.
So, take my free advice instead: 
Grammar rules are often arbitrary, our language is constantly evolving, and progr  ams that focus on "correctness" are full of shit. You can be a good writer. Chances are, you already are a good writer, and it's just bad teachers and internet buffoons and prescriptivist programs that have convinced you that you're not. Language is supposed to be fun - go have fun with it.
End Crawl
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! Be sure to let me know what you think - if you use Grammarly, if you like it, if you hate it, all that kinda stuff - in the comments below. Thank you all for all your support and feedback, it really is super helpful and uplifting, so thank you thank you thank you.
Also, be sure to like and subscribe and do all those YouTube things - it really does help me out. If you want more of me, you can go follow me on Twitter AT Zoe underscore The Bee, and if you want to help me pay my bills, you can come join us on Patreon, where memberships start at only $2 a month. You can get lots of fun stuff like polls and seeing videos early and getting custom-written poems by ME, a real published poet. So if that sounds like something you'd be interested in, you can check that out in the description below!
Anyway, thank you again for watching...and until next time, stay safe, stay warm, and I will see yall again soon, I hope. Bye guys!
Poetics | The What, the Why, and the How of Poetry
Intro
I am an alchemist
tending to elements
a quicksilver pool 
in the palm of my hand
that poisonous looking glass
What do I see?
...
For most people, poetry is either an esoteric, confusing, pretentious art form, or it's the shallow, meaningless, cutesy blurbs that go on greeting cards and love letters.
Whenever I tell people I'm a published poet, I often get various refrains of "Oh, I never really got poetry, y'know?"
And I get it. I didn't really like poetry when I was in school, either. And I think this is actually the biggest problem when it comes to poetry. 
Most of us have been taught wrong. We've been taught that poetry is supposed to be this challenging, deep, serious thing, and that the reader's job is to try to decipher what the poet is "really trying to say."
But I'm here to tell you that that's all...wrong. I'm an English teacher here to tell you that you need to take all the stuff your other English teachers taught you about poetry, especially the idea that there's some "deeper meaning" that you have to "get" in order to "appreciate" poetry, and I want you to gather up all of those thoughts... And dump them in the trash. 
What I'd like to do today is to talk about poetics -- the what, the why, and the how of poetry. I want to bust some of the myths around poetry. I want to set the record straight about what poems are, what they do, and, ultimately how to write good ones.
And this isn't going to be a comprehensive video that covers every single element of poetry writing. There's a reason there are whole full-semester courses and even whole degrees on this kind of thing.
But we are going to cover a lot of ground. So without further ado...
Let's get started.
Part 1: The What and the Why
Before we can do anything else, we first need to define poetry (the "What") and figure out what its purpose is (the "Why").
So...what is a poem?
Well, like I said in the intro, most people have two conceptions of poetry  -  Hallmark card poetry, and the poetry we were forced to read in school (y'know... Shakespeare, Emily Dickinson, T.S. Eliot, etc.).
Now, it's this latter category that I want to focus on specifically in this video. And this isn't going to be a takedown of Ralph Waldo Emerson or anything, but I do want to talk about how our academic conception of poetry has given people a warped idea of what makes something a poem. 
I mean, think about most of the "academic" poems you've read: they're mostly rhymey; they're mostly about love or nature or death or other big, vague ideas; they use long, complicated words; they have to fit a certain structure; and they usually have some "deeper meaning" that it's the reader's job to "figure out". 
When most people think of poems, they think of stoic, lyrical masterpieces. Poems are for talking about Very Serious Things in a Very Serious (and, let's be honest, pretentious) Way.
These are the poetry rules. They're what make something a poem. 
...except they're not.
Poems aren't riddles to be solved. They aren't language puzzles full of twelve-letter words that poets put into the world to make themselves seem smarter than everyone else. And I know that sometimes it really looks that way, but the only reason we think that this is what poetry is, is because of the poetry we read in school, which -- 
Just as an aside, the poetry you read in school, especially stuff like T.S. Eliot, is actually -- for the post part -- not good. It does important stuff, and it changed the genre, and it was part of an important artistic movement, but T.S. Eliot wrote stuff like The Waste Land specifically to be a pretentious ass. He made it hard and confusing and elusive on purpose, to prove a point. That's, like, the whole M.O. of Modernism.
And if you need evidence of this -- evidence that even his contemporaries thought he was kind of a dick -- William Carlos Williams (the guy who wrote the plum poem) said that The Waste Land was "the great catastrophe of our letters...the blast of Eliot's genius which gave the poem back to the academics."
In other words, T.S. Eliot is a pretentious dweeb, and The Waste Land is so difficult that it's going to be used by other pretentious dweebs to make themselves seem clever for "getting it," and that's going to make people hate poetry and poets and anyone else who studies poetry.
Anyway, that aside, these kinds of academic poems have all these rules, and we think we have to follow them when we're writing poetry. But...we don't. But without these rules, how do we know something is a poem?
Well, poetry isn't defined by what's outside  -  the structure, the rhyme scheme, the meter. It's defined by what's inside, by its sounds and its use of language and what it does with that language. Poetry is defined by its purpose.
And the purpose of poetry is to use interesting language to get people to feel new feelings or think new thoughts.
For readers, this means that you don't need to worry about whether or not you've "found" the "deeper meaning" that the poet hid somewhere deep between their lines. It means that you can take poems at face value. Just read them for what's there, on the page. Then, if you read the poem and feel even the slightest pang of emotion, or the briefest thought of "Huh, I never thought of it like that," then...congratulations. You've successfully done A Poetry.
Now, for poets, this purpose of poetry means that you need to think of your poems like experiences. Like snapshots of life -- little vignettes that your readers get transplanted into. You need your reader to see the world through your eyes for a single, brief, but infinitely important moment.
...but what does that actually mean? What does that actually look like when it comes to putting words on a page?
Well...let's find out.
Part 2: The How
O sterling toxin
whose bonds are the bonds
of anti-toxins
whose very matter 
makes elixirs
and brought our greatest minds
to madness--

Who am I to hold you here?
How could I build
from your blighted bones?
What compound could I conjure
whose combination is more
than the sum of its parts?

On Being Concrete and Specific
When people are writing poetry, a lot of time they want to start big and work their way down. They want to write a poem about death or love or abuse or heartbreak or whatever. And then they find some kind of image that they believe represents that. And then they talk about that image in terms of those big ideas and feelings.
But this will almost always fail. Because just talking about feelings doesn't help the reader to actually feel those feelings. 
To show you what I mean by this, take a look at this poem:
		Her beauty danced in the deep moonlight
		I could swim in her eyes for eternity
      Alas I was adrift heartbroken
      Lost at sea
Alright, so...what does this mean? What's happening in this poem? If the purpose of poetry is to make us feel stuff and look at stuff in new and interesting ways...how is this poem doing that?
Well...it's not. I wrote this poem in like, 45 seconds. It's...not good.
And the reason it isn't good is because it's full of abstractions. 
We know what the word "beauty" means, but we don't know what it actually looks like. We know what the word "heartbroken" means, but we don't know what it actually feels like. We know what all those words mean, but just listing them off doesn't make you actually feel those feelings. 
And this is why a lot of "InstaPoetry" like the stuff by Rupi Kaur or Gabbi Hanna or Atticus is...not really very good, usually. Because they say stuff like this [Insert "I do not need the kind of love" Kaur poem] but never actually get us to really feel these things.
Poetry is about pulling the reader in and making them feel the thing you want them to feel, and the only way you can do that is through concrete images. As the adage goes: Show, don't tell.
For a good example, let's look at the poem "After Years" by Ted Kooser:
		Today, from a distance, I saw you
            walking away, and without a sound
            the glittering face of a glacier
            slid into the sea. An ancient oak
            fell in the Cumberlands, holding only
            a handful of leaves, and an old woman
            scattering corn to her chickens looked up
            for an instant. At the other side
            of the galaxy, a star thirty-five times
            the size of our own sun exploded
            and vanished, leaving a small green spot
            on the astronomer's retina
            as he stood on the great open dome
            of my heart with no one to tell.
Now, Ted could have just said, "Today I saw my ex, and it made me really sad." But he didn't.
And he even could have used a clichéd image like, "Today I saw my ex, and it made my heart feel like an exploding sun." But he didn't say that, either. Because it's cliché. And cliches are bad.
Instead, he used images to make us experience the feelings for ourselves. We're shown how heartbreak feels. Even if you've never been heartbroken, after reading this poem, you know exactly what it feels like.
When you write a poem, you should always be circling back to the real, concrete, tangible images. Those are the foundation that your poem is built on, and without them, your poem will crumble.
Now, one thing you may have noticed about the images in "After Years" is that Kooser doesn't just include basic images of things, but he makes his images pop by flavoring them with specific details. 
An ancient oak tree fell in the Cumberlands; a star 35 times the size of the sun left a green spot in the astronomer's vision. These are images that really stick with us, because they are weirdly specific.
Specificity makes things concrete. Unpredictable details are what make the difference between imaginary stories and real stories. Even if the story you are telling in your poem or the image you're describing in your poem is fictional, you want it to feel authentic.
And authenticity comes from those little details  -  the details that make people think, no one could come up with that, it's too weird  -  it has to be true!
For example, if I told you that there was a store that sold "purses and bottles of after-shave," that's...really boring. I mean, it's true, and it's accurate, but it's bland.
But, if I were to tell you, like Thea S. Kuticka does in her poem "Newcastle Bar & Grill," that "a second-hand store displayed gold purses // and a man sold Avon after-shave bottles shaped like Model Ts // and hot rods" your brain is suddenly like, "Oh! OK. This is new." You can really visualize it.
Now, this doesn't mean that you need to cram a thousand details into your poem. Because over-detailing is just as bad as under-detailing. You only want to include details that add to the concrete images that you're using to elicit feeling or pull the reader into the world of your poem.
Use the names of things, if you can; use words with precision; pepper in images that seem to conflict -- like Avon and hotrods -- and add in those little details that you could only know if you were really there. Because, at the end of the day, you want your reader to feel like they were really there.
On Metaphors
Now, we've covered how to make people feel like they're really in your poem, and that helps with the experiential and "feeling" part of the purpose of poetry. But what about the "interesting connection" thing? What about getting your reader to think about things in a new way?
Well, the way you do that, is through metaphor. 
Now, for the rest of this video, I'm going to be using the word "metaphor" to cover all metaphor-adjacent terms, like simile and symbolism and allegory. They're not perfect synonyms, and they all have their own particular definitions, but when I say "metaphor," know that I mean any and all metaphoric devices.
Russian literary critic Viktor Shklovsky said -- and I'm paraphrasing -- good art makes familiar things feel strange, and strange things feel familiar. He described this concept using the word "ostraneniye," which means "defamiliarization," but the more literal translation is closer to "strangeifying."
So, good art makes things feel strange and alien to us, like we're seeing things for the first time. And this is what metaphor does. 
Metaphors work because they make connections between otherwise un-connectable things. And making those connections -- finding where things overlap, where two totally different things have something in common -- gives our brains happy signals. Because we like seeing how things work together. We like discovery.
This is kind of similar to what I talked about in my Lovecraft series with the uncanny. The uncanny scares us because we can't figure it out. We can't make the connection make sense.
But metaphors are the opposite. They're appealing because the writer finds a way to make the different things similar. The writer has seen the overlap and illuminates it so you can see it, too. By reading their poem, by reading their metaphor, you now see things in a different light.
Take Edgar Allen Poe's "For Annie,":
            Thank Heaven! the crisis,
            The danger, is past,
            And the lingering illness
            Is over at last -- 
            And the fever called "Living"
            Is conquered at last.
In this first stanza of the poem, Poe gives us the metaphor "Life is Illness" which draws a connection between two things that...seem like opposites. But...when we read the rest of the poem, where he talks about how Annie has died, and he is grieving her, but that he will get to see her again soon, we realize -- oh, okay, grief does kind of feel like being sick; and dying -- having an escape from that -- would probably feel like getting over that sickness. 
It surprises us, it opens our eyes to something new, and our brains love that shit.
So here's another one that comes from the beginning of Brenda Hillman's "Yellow Tractate"
            Smart daffodils! They waited
till the cold snap was over, then brought themselves
into the corridor, like lamps of pity  - 
In these lines, we have two interesting metaphors: We have a row of daffodils being called a "corridor," and the daffodils themselves being called "lamps of pity."
These metaphors make you think about things in ways you haven't thought of before...and they work. Rows of daffodils are kind of like a corridor, like walls that you walk between, that maybe feel a little claustrophobic. And the heads of daffodils do look kind of like lamps that are bowing their heads in pity.
Metaphors force us to imagine connections between unlike things -- death and freedom; life and illness; daffodils and lamps -- and by forcing us to imagine that, our minds are opened. We can now see different angles, angles that we'd never have imagined before reading that poem.
When you're writing a metaphor, you need to make sure that it isn't cliché -- stop comparing death to a candle going out; stop comparing love to fire; stop comparing sex or abusive relationships to drugs. If you aren't making new connections -- or subverting the expectations that come with old, cliché connections -- then you need to find a new angle.
Oh, and, uh...if you're struggling to make a metaphor, but you know that you have one, please, for the love of everything that is holy, don't do this. [Insert Gabbi Hanna poem]
New, interesting connections and new, weird overlaps between ideas are fundamental to the power of your poem.
Metaphors are the backbone of your poem. Because metaphors -- interesting connections that make us think about the world around us in ways that we never would have come up with on our own -- are the purpose of poems. They are the most important tool that you have at your disposal.
On Sounding Good
Alright, so, we have all these elements: These concrete images decorated with details, and all of it tied together with metaphors, but, like...what makes it have that...poetry...thing, y'know?
Well, poems need language that sounds good to our ears and tastes good when we read it aloud. And sound is important because it elicits feelings and makes us think about things in a new way. Because we aren't used to sound being a top priority in the things we read. We're used to content and purpose and all that rhetorical garbage being what the writer is most focused on.
But in poetry, the content comes second to the aesthetic. And one of the most important elements of aesthetic, in poetry, at least, is sound. So when things sound interesting and weird and different and...like...really nice...we're caught off guard. And then pulled in...
I'm going to read the last stanza of T.S. Eliot's The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock, and I want you to close your eyes and listen to the sounds of the words as I read them. 
            I have seen them riding seaward on the waves
            Combing the white hair of the waves blown back
            When the wind blows the water white and black.
            We have lingered in the chambers of the sea
            By sea-girls wreathed with seaweed red and brown
            Till human voices wake us, and we drown.
All the vowel sounds and consonant sounds in this stanza are working together, and the pleasing nature of the sounds is what we call "mellifluous" language. This mellifluous language helps the reader glide through the poem, carried along by the waves of the words, sometimes abruptly interrupted by rocky consonants. 
It gives a rhythm to the poem. It makes us want to keep going. It calls to us, leads us into the depths of the lines, like a linguistic siren. 
So what does this mean when it comes to you writing your own poems? Well, I'm not going to throw a bunch of words at you and then give you a vocabulary test, but what it comes down to is this: Make it sound good. 
Find words that have internal rhymes, that have similar consonant sounds, that have syllables that feel rhythmic and kind of make you wanna dance or bob your head a little bit when you read them.
That's where the music of poetry comes from, and that's what will make your poem sing.
On Purpose
Poems allow us to see the world through new eyes.
This is why a lot of those "poetry rules" that we talked about at the beginning are wrong and bad. Because all those things -- strict rhyme schemes, formal structure, cliché metaphors -- have all been done. They've been done for hundreds of years. They've been done to death. They don't make us feel things. They don't give us anything new to think about.
But, that isn't to say that you should totally ignore all those elements. They can be good, but only when they're used in the right way and used with purpose and used with caution. You're allowed to do whatever you want, as long as you have a good reason for it.
What I mean is... Let's think of poems like food. 
All the poetic elements you have to choose from are different ingredients and spices. And when you're choosing which ingredients to include in your dish, you must do so with purpose.
Let's explore this metaphor a little bit.
There are no bad spices, but not every spice works in every dish. Garlic -- like rhyming -- is fine, and it's been used by lots of people in lots of dishes, so much so that it feels like you have to include it if you're making anything savory.
But you don't have to. You can cut back -- only use a little bit here and there -- because too much can be incredibly overwhelming. You don't want the garlic to be the only thing people remember from your poem -- or...food.
Metaphors are like...flavor combinations. Yeah, there are the cliches like peanut butter and chocolate, and those are good and fine, but they're not exciting. They're something you lean on as a comfort food. They're not doing anything groundbreaking in the world of culinary science.
Good metaphors are the flavor combinations that you're a little bit scared of, a little bit nervous to try because the ingredients are so different, how could it possibly work? Like peanut butter on a bacon cheeseburger. Or cheddar cheese on your apple pie. Those are weird-ass combinations. But...surprisingly...they taste really good. 
And good poets -- like food scientists -- have studied enough and have learned enough about chemical makeup of the stuff they're working with that they have a good idea of what will work and what won't. There are always new things to discover, but they don't have to reinvent the wheel each time they write a metaphor or pair two foods together.
And, in poems as in food, presentation is important -- well, it can be. You can put most things on a plate or in a bowl, like most poems are left aligned. And that's great and that's classic, and no one will think you're boring for doing so.
But there are also restaurants that purposefully put their food in weird containers. And people love it. Just like they love e.e. cummings, who personally murdered conventional line structure. [insert any e.e. cummings poem here] And this is the same for line length, too. There are some people who like bigger servings, and some people who like smaller servings, and both are perfectly fine in different contexts.
And, ultimately, when you make a dish or write a poem, there will be people who don't like it. There are people out there who don't like pizza. Actually -- and this is true -- my best friend in grade school didn't like pizza...or water, actually -- she always had to put those, like, flavor powders into her bottles of water that she brought for lunch.
Sorry, Emily, if you're watching this. You're perfect just the way you are. ...even if you do have some pretty unacceptable food preferences.
But, all that to say, there will be people who don't like your poems. And you have to be okay with that.
Because there will also be people for whom your writing is their favorite food.
Part 3: Writing a Poem
So before I close out this video, I want to show you what all this advice actually looks like when it comes to the actual writing of poems.
But before I hope over to the writing-cam, I want to bring up two of the books I used for this video. So, most of the ideas in this video came from stuff I've learned while in creative writing classes and just...doing writing... But I also got some of the more concrete tips from these two books. Why Poetry by Matthew Zapruder is more about the philosophy of poetry, and The Poetry Home Repair Manual by previous U.S. Poet Laureate Ted Kooser is more about concrete, pragmatic "here's how to write a poem" stuff. They are super great, and I highly recommend them if you're interested in writing poetry! As always, I will have links to these and everything else I can link to in the description below.
Alright, let's hop over to my little writing cam and write a poem. If you're not interested in this bit, go ahead and fast-forward to the time-stamp on screen; but for the rest of us, let's head on over.
[THE REST OF THIS SECTION WILL BE HAND-CAM]
Okay, so first we need to start with something concrete, something that is based on a particular image or memory or something. So...
Oh! So in our house that we're renting, we have a screened-in back porch that has a door to the backyard, and we've also had these huge bumblebees [bumblebee photo] and one of them has been on the screen for like three days, and I don't know if it's alive, but I'm afraid to touch it because I don't want to hurt it, and I also don't know that I really even want to know whether it's alive or dead.
Anyway, I really like that image and some of those issues with not wanting to know, so I think I want to do something with that.   
Okay, so let's get started. I think I want to open with describing the bee.
 She (I'm assuming she's female. I don't know much about sexing bees, but she's big and poofy and I love her and I want her to be a girl, so she is.) clings to the window 
 all pollen and puff (I like the "p" sounds, and the "l" sounds)
 and lazily stretches her (okay, let's describe her wings without being cliché. They're see-through, so the easy thing would be glass, but I don't want to go that way. So the way they're segmented, they almost look like...bubbles? And that might help keep some of that light, fun tone we have going here) soap-bubble wings
 (Alright, let's bring in the mystery of "Is she alive?") shuddering into the breeze
 (Okay, what is the breeze doing?) as it buffets against her
 (Oh, let's make this a fur coat image. I like that) in her antique fur
 coat so precious 
 and small
 (Alright, we've really hyped up this bee. We love this bee. Let's have another stanza and bring in the viewer, and have them take a closer look) You watch her move
 with the wind
 and wonder if it's her
 or the wind
 that (I'm looking for a good word for "makes" or "generates"...maybe "induces" or "compels"? I like "compels") compels each trembling lurch (I don't like the word "move" here. Let's try "lurch")
 of her wings (this keeps the rhyme with "wind" that I think sounds nice)
 (Okay, final bit. Let's get the image of touching her, or maybe not touching her, and see where it goes) You could reach out
 a fingertip touch against the untouchable (I like the parallel words there, and a bee is pretty much untouchable, since...y'know...stingers)
 (I really want to bring in a simile here. Because I want to visualize touching something really lightly. And I think it'd be interesting to bring in a really old document. That could crumble, just like the bee could if she were dead) like an archivist poring
 over some forgotten lore (Bringing in that "Raven" reference)
 (I want to do more to visualize just how light of a touch they are using. I could say something about a "hair" or something, but I actually kind of like the image of something resting inbetween the lines of your fingerprints. So let's work with that) an ancient page's edge resting 
 in the grooves of your fingerprints
 a breathless searching so silent (Because if you even breathe too hard, it could be bad for the artifact)
 (Alright, I want to end this with something about how if you try to find your answer, the page could crumble. But I don't know how to say that in an interesting way.) for an answer you know
 can only be found in the
 crumbling of the page
 into dust.
And now for the title. Um... Let's name the poem after the bee. "Ode to the Bumblebee"
Alright, let's head back over and see what we think!
[cut back to reading the poem while in the chair]
So... While this poem isn't perfect -- I think the plot could be tightened up a little bit, I think it meanders a little -- I do think we have a lot of good sounds, a lot of nice images, and I really like the simile there at the end with the ancient text. Now, revising poems takes a lot of work and a lot of time -- like weeks -- so I'm not going to do that now.
So, in the meantime, I dedicate this...not quite perfect poem to my newest Necromancer Patron Comrade Fox.

This is... "Ode to the Bumblebee"

She clings to the window
all pollen and puff
and lazily stretches her soap-bubble wings
shuddering into the breeze
as it buffets against her
in her antique fur
coat so precious
and small

You watch her move
with the wind
and wonder if it's her
or the wind
that compels each trembling lurch
of her wings

You could reach out
a fingertip touch against the untouchable
like an archivist poring
over some forgotten lore
an ancient page's edge resting
in the grooves of your fingerprints
a breathless searching so silent
for an answer you know
can only be found 
in the crumbling of the page
into dust
Conclusion
O little quicksilver
puddle of heavy wetness
dry and cold,
or some deceptive stone
so smooth but untouchable.

I hold you in my hands
your lifeless un-life existence
against my skin
and then

there you are

a silver snake
with each twitch and heartbeat shudder
you spring to life, coil-uncoil
venom dripping from icicle teeth
alive and whole and here
and here.

What this all comes down to, really, is that poetry is...complicated. But just not as complicated as your high school English teacher may have taught you that it is.
Poetry is meant to help us feel new things and think new thoughts. To see connections between things that we wouldn't have thought to connect on our own. To enter into a conscious dream -- an experience that is equal parts surreal and authentic. To see through the eyes of someone who has seen the strings that connect loops of the universe.
But poetry is also...just words on a page -- words that are chosen very carefully, but they're still just words. And, like I've said before on this channel, you have all the freedom in the world to play with words. I want you to play with words.
Play with language. Play with poetry. Put words together that are silly or weird or sound funny or sound beautiful. Look for the connections between things. Next time you spill something, look for a recognizable shape in the puddle. Look up at the clouds and find animals and flowers and faces and feelings. Go sit in the park and just...be.
And then put that into words. Choose you words carefully, avoid abstractions, be purposeful, and then...write.
End Crawl
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! This month is actually national poetry month here in the U.S., and I didn't realize that until after writing this whole thing, so...it's funny how that works out, haha 
So, I am actually considering doing some poetry-writing on a livestream, where you all would get to give me input and help shape the poems -- um, if that would be interesting for y'all, and I will definitely do it, so let me know in the comments if you would be interested in that  -  and I'm not sure if I want to do it on Twitch or here on YouTube...I've never used Twitch, and I'm kind of afraid of it, but  -  I don't know, I'll figure it out, haha
And let me know if there's anything here that you want me to do a deep-dive into, and I can! Part of me wants to make videos talking specifically about bad poetry from folks like Gabbi Hanna, but I also don't know if I want to indulge that, and just stay positive, but if you want me to do a stream or a video where I do that...let me know.
Also, today's illustrations were done by Audra, an artist that I've started to work with on my videos, and aren't these just the best??? Anyway, give her some love in the comments, and be sure to check out her portfolio in the description -- she is amazing.
Anyway, if you want more of me, you can come follow me on Twitter at Zoe_TheBee, and if you want to help me make more of this kind of thing, then feel free to join us on Patreon, where you can get cool stuff like polls and getting videos early and even getting poems written for you, by me.
Speaking of which, today's video was brought to you by the horrifying and terrible Eldritch abominations known as Zowber, Sigwa, Ryan, and A Tasty Snack, and to honor the newest one, I'm going to read a poem I wrote well before this script...
For A Tasty Snack, this is...

A patch of violets, visited twice
                                       I
I was barefoot in the backyard
surrounded, at a glance,
by half-smoked cigarettes,
all hand-rolled by some
tender rodent hand
(or else by Earth herself)
and then placed in
delicate green cigarette holders
fit for upper-crust chipmunks
and moles.

                                      II
I returned to find it gentrified,
no longer that ashtray patch
of white-on-green, but a new
blue. No more tender paws
and imagined smoke rings; but
hoods splayed wide and
bathed in spoiled wine,
with a musty skunkness
from sitting too long 
in the sun.

Until next time, stay safe, stay warm, and I will see y'all again soon, I hope. Bye, folks! 😊

How to Write Video Essays
So you want to write a video essay. But every time you try to start...you feel like you just aren't getting anywhere. There has to be a better way!
Introducing: Zoe Bee's Essay-o-matic
With the essay-o-matic, you too can write flawless video essays in only 8 easy-to-follow steps. For the low, low payment of zero dollars - this is literally free - you can finally fulfill your dreams of being the greatest video essayist of aaaaallll tiiiiiime.
So how can you accomplish this incredible feat? With the essay-o-matic's patented Top Eight List format, simply follow these eight easy steps and you will become the next great video essayist!
1. Write What You Know (Who Are You?)
First: Write What You  --  okay, I'm not going to do that voice for this whole list. I don't want that, and I don't think you want that either. Also, now that I'm back to being Zoe Me, please remember that this list isn't definitive or comprehensive. It's just the advice of a writing teacher and content creator. So all these points come with lots and lots of salt.
Anyway, number one is writing what you know. Now I know this is a common piece of writing advice that's often misunderstood, but what I mean in this case is that when you're coming up with ideas for video essays, you should focus on topics in which you have knowledge, experience, or authority.
This is because you need to give people a reason to watch your videos. You need to give them a reason to choose your video over someone else's, a reason to listen to you, a reason to trust you. PhilosophyTube and Contrapoints both studied philosophy; Veritasium was a science educator before becoming a YouTuber; Alexa Donne has written and published several books.
In my case, I talk about reading, writing, rhetoric, and education, because I have studied and taught all those things. We watch these videos because we know the creators have the experience and, in some cases, expertise in those subjects. They talk about philosophy, science, and writing because it's what they know. It's what they've studied. It's their craft that they've honed over the years. 
And you also don't have to have a degree in whatever you're talking about, and you don't have to flash your credentials every time you open your mouth, but as far as idea generation goes, thinking about what you know - what makes you a unique voice in this ocean of content - is a good first place to start.
Now, that's not to say you can never cover things outside your wheelhouse. Doing research and learning new things and sharing that new knowledge with people is great! But writing what you do know is a good starting point.
2. Focus (Stop Trying to Take Down Capitalism in 20 Minutes)
Step two is Focus. So, you've decided that since you have a degree or experience in...history, that you want to write a video somehow relating to capitalism, or the history of neoliberalism or...something like that. 
You cannot fit a comprehensive takedown of capitalism in a 25-minute video. Or a 60-minute video. Or even a 90-minute video. You just can't. Now take the word capitalism and replace it with any other big economic or philosophical or cultural concept.
All these things are way too big to talk about in a broad, all-encompassing way. So what you should do instead is take that big concept and either a) apply it to something more specific b) only look at a very specific part of that big thing, or c) just write a book. Video essays aren't the medium for you, bud.
Now, I'm not going to give bad examples here, but I will point out some good examples. Like Folding Ideas' video "Jamie Oliver's War on Nuggets." This video is about a specific man and some specific nugs. But it's also about the entire concept of food and class. It's about how we often think of food in terms of "clean" and "dirty." But the only reason we get these big ideas is because they're packaged in the small, easily digestible nuggets of...nuggets.
Another good example of this is hbomberguy's video, "Vaccines: A Measured Response." In this video, it seems like he's going to destroy the entire anti-vax movement. But that's quite a bit. And I think he knew that it would be way more than he could handle. So what he did instead was focus on the specific study that is cited as the core text of the anti-vax movement.
By debunking this one text - by looking at this text and its author, by highlighting the wild, cruel, immoral practices associated with it - hbomb was able to talk about the core of the anti-vax movement, without biting off more than he could chew. Because he's a great content creator, but I don't think even he could make a good video that is a takedown of the whole anti-vax movement.
Okay, I think I've said anti-vax enough. Let's not get demonetized, Zoe. But Zoe! Philosophy Tube and Contrapoints have videos about big ideas! Okay, this is a valid point. But...3 things: 1. No they don't. They have videos titled like they're about huge topics, but the videos themselves are actually more focused than they appear. 2, Yeah, they do do that. They've got it covered. Those channels have that corner of the market. And 3...once you have a million subscribers you can do whatever you want and you'll get views. This video isn't about them.
So it's not that you can't talk about big concepts at all; you just need to take those big concepts and do something with them. Make them smaller, more manageable - apply them to specific, concrete, everyday things. If you think the thing you're talking about could be turned into a whole, full-semester college class... It's probably too big. So take it, make it more specific, focus it down into its essential parts, and then you can tackle it.
3. Do Something New (Not Another Lootbox Video)
Step Three is a little bit harder, because with this one you need to do something new. So let's say you've taken this history idea and distilled it down to be about how profit motives have affected art, specifically video games. And maybe you want to focus it even more and look specifically at loot boxes.
Great. Awesome idea. Love it. ...except it's been done before. Like...a lot. And if you make a video about it...what else can you add? Do you have a unique perspective? Have things changed since the other videos were posted? Do you think those other videos got things wrong, or overlooked some things, and you want to correct it or fill in those gaps?
All of those are great reasons to cover already-discussed topics. But otherwise...you should probably talk about something else. Unless you're doing it as a vanity project. Because we all need those. Did I need to make a takedown of a PragerU video? No. Was it necessary for the public? Probably not. But was it fun and gratifying junk-food-in-video-format? Hell yeah, it was.
So what does "new" look like? Well, "new" is a hard thing to look at, because as soon as someone makes something "new," that thing...stops being "new." But one creator that does a good job of finding "new" stuff is Jacob Geller. He finds topics that most of us would just...never think about. Like this one, where he talks about how schools in the U.S. are being constructed with school shootings in mind. That's wild! No one is talking about that.
But, finding new ideas can be daunting, so if you're struggling to find totally new topics, something you can do instead is find a new angle from which to look at an old topic, like in Shaun's video on the death penalty. Where most arguments for or against capital punishment come at it from either a moral angle or an efficacy one, he looks at it from a political angle. Instead of asking "is capital punishment right," or "is capital punishment effective," he asks "should the government be given the power to decide who lives and dies?"
You can also look at these well-hashed topics with new depth. Like how Action Button does video game reviews - something that...we really don't need more of on the internet...please stop making video game reviews...we have enough - but what makes his reviews stand out is that they're all like three hours long, going into the subject's cultural and historical legacy.
This doesn't mean you can never discuss topics that bigger or more popular channels have discussed. It just means you should find a new angle, a unique perspective, something to make your video stand out. I know you have something unique to say, you just need to find it.
4. Thesis Statement (Find the Kernel)
Moving on to step four - now that you've found your idea and you know that your idea is worth saying, now you can actually start writing. Yeah, you get almost halfway into this list before you even start putting words on a page. I'm a writing teacher, I promise you this is how the writing process works. 
So you have this idea, and now you want to start writing. Well, before you do that, before you put any words down on the page, I want you to stop - take the nebulous idea that's in your brain - and ask yourself: "What do I want people to know after they've watched my video?"
Then write down your answer to that question. And I'm gonna do the teacher thing where I tell you to answer the question in complete sentences, but trust me - it's for a good reason. Because this statement - what we in the biz call a thesis statement - is the most important sentence in your whole script. And you're probably not even going to say it out loud.
What you're doing with this sentence is distilling down this whole idea into a single sentence (or, more likely, a couple sentences) that is a concentrated version of your entire still-unwritten script. And the reason why you should write this first is because it gives you a goal - it gives you a kernel to grow the rest of your essay from. You latch onto this centerpiece, this cornerstone, and build the rest of your essay around it.
And your kernel should also be geared toward your audience. Who is it that you're hoping to reach? Are you hoping to change minds? Reinforce beliefs? Tear down existing frameworks and build up new paradigms? Is it just indulgent? That's okay too!
You need to have an idea of who your audience is because that will shape how the rest of your essay looks. Because what works for one audience won't work for another. And not being aware of your audience can lead to echo chambers and not actually changing minds when you had hoped to. So you always need to keep this in mind when you make your kernel.
But - there's always a "but" - that doesn't mean your kernel is forever. You are free to change it at any point. And sometimes, you should change it. If you find new ideas while doing research or if you decide to focus on a slightly different angle, then your kernel should change along with your ideas.
Once you have your kernel, that's when you can start to do some research and put lots of words on the page - and this process, the actual nitty-gritty of research and the mechanical act of writing...those are topics that could be their own video, and I'm not going to talk about them here. This video is about the shape and flavor of video essays, not a fool-proof formula. This isn't about exactly what you should do, it's about the why that underpins how video essays work.
5. Write a Journey (Strip on Stage)
Your next step...begins with a story. See, our wonderful editor here on the channel is Charlie Flowers. But before he was a video editor, Charlie was in a punk band. He is very cool. Much cooler than me.
Anyway, Charlie told me that he went into shows with the mindset that the performance was an experience, and that when you experience something, it changes you. And the way he translated that to the stage performance was through his clothing. He would start the show wearing one thing - usually layers, like a jacket or a scarf, or...I don't know, what do people wear for punk shows?
Anyway, he'd start the show wearing all this stuff, and then, periodically, as he went through the songs, he'd take layers off. His hair would get messy. He'd visibly change as he - and the audience - went through the experience of the show. And he - and the audience - would be different at the end than they were at the beginning.
And when we started working together, he told me this story as a way to help me think about my content. I needed to think of my script as an experience and metaphorically strip on stage. I need to think about where my audience is at the beginning of the video, then think about how I want them to change after having watched the video, and then I need to figure out how to get them there.
This is what I did with my White Trash food video. I started out with a little anecdote to set the scene - an anecdote that takes the viewer back hundreds of years - and then I start talking about modern diets, but I talk about them from a sort of detached, distanced perspective. And then I do a costume change and start talking about how this topic affects me, personally. I started with this really abstract, hypothetical thing, and then over the course of the video I brought the viewer closer and closer until we were talking about individuals. This individual, specifically.
But you don't have to do costume changes to get this effect. Dan Olsen, the mind behind Folding Ideas, did this in his video, In Search of a Flat Earth. But he goes in sort of the opposite direction from what I did - he starts with a specific lake and a specific experiment, and then it grows and grows until he's talking about QAnon and how and why people believe conspiracies. It's incredible.
Another incredible example that I love is Philosophy Tube's video, Data. In this video, Abby has a "conversation" with another character, and they discuss privacy and personal data and not only does it have some great eye-opening information, but it's also presented like... You know how in video games sometimes you're having a conversation with an NPC and you accidentally choose the mean dialogue option, so you quick-load the previous save so you can start the conversation over and choose the better option? It's like that.
This video follows the whole conversation, all the different branches of the dialogue tree, and through it, we're taken through all the different directions that the conversation could go. We see all the rhetorical questions, we see where certain points might take us, we see what kinds of things could end the conversation. It's just... I think this is one of Philosophy Tube's best videos - it is so, so good.
Anyway, this isn't a foolproof solution and it can be hard to think of your factual, educational content as a story. But stories help us absorb information, and it makes videos more enjoyable to watch, and it allows you to stretch some of those creative muscles that you might not always use when writing other kinds of factual, educational things.
6. Analogies, Examples, & Humor (Analogies are salty)
So now you have all this important research-y stuff, but you want to make sure people actually understand what you're saying. Well, that's where step 6 comes in. See, it's one thing to have all these great ideas and complicated points, but it's a whole other thing for people to actually "get it". This step is about making it easier for people to "get it" without over simplifying the content of your ideas.
First, is analogies. And I like to think of analogies like salt. Because salt is the most basic - and most vital - food seasoning. The way salt works is pretty complicated, but basically it just makes everything taste better. It suppresses our perception of bad flavors, which actually increases our perception of good flavors. It essentially primes us for the good flavors of our foods.
Analogies are just like this. Analogies - or metaphors or similes; all the ways you can explain something by comparing it to something else - all these things can prime our brains for the complex "flavors" of your main points. And you shouldn't over-do it - I think we've all had those dishes where there's too much salt and then it becomes all you can taste, and it sucks. So don't lean too heavily on them, but in moderation, it makes your arguments so much better and easier to digest.
Another tool is examples. Now, I like to think of examples like the Food Network. Because it's one thing to read a recipe, but sometimes we need to see a recipe get made. And seeing other people make a recipe can help us get an idea of what we need to do when we make the recipe. It's really helpful, especially for people who learn best by seeing things modeled.
In this vein, you should also include examples in your video essays. I did that throughout this video, when I brought up example videos for most of the items on this list. But, just like watching a bunch of chefs doesn't actually make you a better chef, there is such a thing as too many examples. If all you have is examples, then you don't have any substance. So you need to make sure you balance your stuff with the stuff of others.
The final tool that I want to talk about is humor. And I like to think of humor like hot sauce. Or cayenne. Or paprika. Or red pepper flakes. Basically it's spice. Like, spicey spice. Because people's tolerances and tastes vary, and it's very easy to have too much - and if you have too much, people just won't be able to eat your dish. ...or watch your video.
And just like I am not very good at jokes, I also don't have a very high spice tolerance. I am very white. But if you don't have any bite - even the smallest amount of black pepper at the very least - then your dish is going to feel like it's missing something. And it won't be as easy to eat. ...or watch.
And if you - like me - struggle with outright humor, don't worry too much about being funny. Just be loose. The moment you tighten up and try to look all professional and humorless and like a Very Serious Person with Very Serious Opinions, people - paradoxically - aren't going to take you seriously. That's why I've tried to cultivate this atmosphere of coziness. Because the stuff I talk about is...usually pretty serious and academic, but it doesn't have to feel that way.
7. Write Like You're Talking (Don't Write Like You're Writing)
Step number 7 is "don't write like you're writing; write like you're talking," and this is something I think might be a hot take or unpopular opinion, but... this is my video. I can say whatever I want, you're not the boss of me.
In the early days of ye ole internet, video essays were a new art form. We had people like Lindsay Ellis and Every Frame a Painting who were taking this platform that was known for sketches and flash animations and comedy songs and doing something revolutionary. They were making long-form educational content.
And they thrived. The video essay as we know it was born and people loved that style of content. Over the years, more folks popped up, and even today - especially with the pandemic - more people than ever are starting YouTube channels to talk about educational, critical, political, and artistic stuff. And most of what people make is built on the foundations that these early pioneers created.
But...while we can and should borrow from the greats, we also need to accept that the genre of "video essay" is changing. What worked in ye olden days isn't what works now, and I don't think that's just a shift in trends; I think it's a honing of the genre. As we've grown and more people have thrown their hats into the virtual ring, we've figured out what works and what doesn't. As a collective, we've gotten a lot better at content creation.
But Zoe! What does this have to do with writing advice? Well, dear viewer, traditional video essayists - the first wave, as I call them - were trying to carve out a niche for themselves, and part of how they did that was by using the language and style of academia. Basically, they used big words and spoke in a certain way and their essays sounded like...well...essays.
And then in comes the second wave, where we have people like Big Joel and PhilosophyTube and Innuendo Studios, and they make video essays while also bringing some life into the genre. Their essays don't sound like essays; they sound like...a friend explaining something to you. A smart friend. A...maybe pretentious friend. But a friend. And I believe this 100% comes down to the writing.
Now, people who are currently making videos - those of us in the third wave - we have the opportunity to shape the genre conventions of this new era for video essays. And I think the trend that we've seen so far - moving away from the language of academia, and moving into a more casual, conversational style - is the future of video essays.
Casual language isn't just good for explanation - though it definitely is; it's a lot easier to understand things when they're explained to you in conversational language - but it's also better for performance. When you read your script - and most video essays are scripted; this is about writing scripts - you don't want to sound like a bored professor at an academic conference just reading out your article from a podium. No one wants that.
But writing in academic language lends itself to that style. Because what works in writing doesn't usually work in spoken language. Sentence structures that are great for essays can be awful for videos. Fragments? You're not allowed to have that in essays, but they work great for videos. And grammar? Nah.
And this isn't to say you can't use any academic language. You can. Again, I'm not the boss of you, you can do whatever you want. But, if you are going to use complex language, I have one piece of advice. Make sure your words are precise. Don't use turns of phrase that don't fit - like, there was a video I was watching the other day that was talking about "the app known as TikTok"...it's not "known as TikTok" it is TikTok. Just say "the app TikTok"...or just "TikTok" - ANYWAY, just be precise in your language. 
Pay attention to every word, interrogate every single word, make sure every word belongs, does something important, and isn't redundant. Alright, English professor spiel over. When you talk like a person - when you talk to the camera the way you would talk to a friend - your content becomes 100x better. You're more approachable, less pretentious, more easily understood, more fun to listen to. So go ahead. Put those ums and uhs and ellipses and italics in your script. 
Write in sentences that your English teacher would have hated. End with rhetorical questions and make little faces and just have fun. Because what's the point of doing all this if it isn't fun...right? Let the words flow out of your fingers the same way they come out of your mouth. Your fingers are your new mouth. Don't write like you're writing; write like you're talking.
8. Remember the Medium (This is YouTube)
The final step - step number 8 - is to remember the medium. You're writing a video essay for a reason. So keep that in mind while you're writing. This is also related to number 7 in that a lot of people write video essays like they write...essay essays. But you're not writing an essay. You're writing a video essay.
So what do I mean by "remember the medium"? Like, what is the real difference between a regular essay and a video essay? Well, videos are time-based, whereas essays aren't. When people are reading things, like essays, they can take their time, they can go back and reread things, they can skip ahead. But videos are different. 
And this isn't to say people can't change the play-speed of the video or go back and rewatch something or skip forward. They can do all those things here on YouTube.com. But I just mean that writing is inherently a physical medium, where video is a temporal - or time-based - medium. So whenever you want to phrase things spatially - like saying "as I mentioned above" - you should instead phrase them temporally, like "as I mentioned earlier".
Now, this isn't, like...a total dealbreaker. It's not like saying "as I mentioned above" is going to totally take someone out of the moment and make them leave your video and unsubscribe from your channel or anything. But I think that this specific problem represents a more general issue.
Because, as the immortal Marshall Mcluhan constantly reminds us from beyond the grave, "The medium is the message." Which is just a nice little way of saying "the medium" - or the platform you use to deliver your message - "affects the content of whatever message is being filtered through that medium." A photograph of a goose and a 2D image of a goose mean two very different things to you, even though they are of the same goose.
If I were communicating only in audio, you would get something different from my videos than if I also included these visuals of my human husk that exists here in this accursed material world. So, if you're choosing to use YouTube - a medium that is both sound- and video-based; a medium that is inherently temporal - then you need to take advantage of what is offered to you by this specific medium.
Ask yourself why you're on YouTube. What do you want to get out of your channel; what do you want your viewers to get out of your videos? And what is it about YouTube specifically that allows you to do that?
Because maybe you could accomplish those things a lot easier on a different platform or with a different medium. Maybe your videos would be better as an audio-only podcast. Maybe they would work better as texts, as essays or books. Or maybe even just as long Twitter threads.
You can follow all these steps I've laid out, but if your content just isn't right for this platform - if your messages get too warped by the medium - then these tips and tricks just aren't going to help. Because they're tips for YouTube specifically. They're tips for making audiovisual content on an audiovisual platform for people who want to consume audiovisual stuff. Your mileage may vary.
Conclusion
With these 8 steps, you can become a...pretty good video essayist. Probably. There's lots of other moving parts that make this whole thing function - and let me know if you want me to talk about all the other stuff that goes into [motion to the general stuff around] this.
And, like I said at the beginning, all of this should be taken with piles upon piles of salt. I'm just one person making...stuff...here on the internet, and I am by no means an expert. However, I have been fairly successful in my own right so I wanted to share what I think are some of the reasons I got to where I am.
Nothing is foolproof and there is no easy route to success. But if your goal is to make well-written stuff, well...I can help with that. As I used to tell my students, helping people with writing is literally my job. It's just that my class size went from 25 to...a little more than that.
But I do still love writing and teaching writing, and I will take any excuse to talk about writing-related stuff. Because with better writing comes better idea-sharing, and if you want to be a video essayist that means you want to share your ideas. So...go ahead and share them. Add your voice to the millions of other voices that are here, screaming into the void.
Happy writing :)
End Crawl
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! If you want any more of these writing-tips or content-creation tip-type videos, be sure to let me know in the comments. And if you like the video, be sure to like and comment and subscribe and do all those YouTube things.
This video was brought to you by my wonderful Patrons and Members whose names you can see scrolling...somewhere here. If you want to join them, then go ahead and click the link in the description or hit the join button right beside the subscribe button.
I want to give an extra special thanks to A Tasty Snack, Adam, Al Sweigart, Dylan, Robert Bradford, and Science Punk Sellout. Thank you all so very much.
And now we have our Patron Poem of the video. For The Maiden of Stories here is "Turning"

Turning

The woodcarver lays out her tools:
chipping bits and chisels, bone-smooth handled.
burl held in the lathe between artist and vision
begins to spin, imperfections melting into rings

In expert hands, metal against wood,
she presses

The chisel plucks and bites and eats
and slow and loud the burl becomes
something else only she can see,
and, emboldened, pushes deeper.

In an absentminded moment - mere minutes - 
it's gone. 

The burl strewn across the floor,
wood chips made of potential - 
that she sweeps away 
and burns.

And until next time, Stay Safe, Stay Warm, and I'll see y'all again soon, I hope. Bye folks :)
TITLE HERE
Anecdote
A few weeks ago, I was on Facebook, and this woman  -  Shawna  -  had posted in a parenting group asking for help with installing her son's car seat. Shawna said that the car seat came with an instruction manual, but that she's "not good with instructions so she needs something simple and to the point."
The comments were...less than helpful. They said things like "this is what happens when idiots have children," and "she's the reason her kids are gonna die in a car crash *shrugging emoji*" and "she's either illiterate or just fucking lazy."
There were hundreds of comments, most of which were negative. After all this, Shawna left a final response before she deleted the post: "This is my child. I asked for help with the car seat, not me reading. Bye. Find something better to do if you don't have no help."
So...the thing is...this was posted in a progressive parenting group. A group with rules like "Be Kind and Courteous" and "No Racism, Sexism, or any other -ism"... And yet...
Here were these so-called progressive, "woke" people making fun of a woman for her struggles with reading and writing.
Isn't there something...wrong with that?
Today, I want to investigate literacy, why "illiterate" is used as an insult, why it shouldn't be, and why illiteracy is a social justice issue that needs to be taken seriously. 
So, consider this a callout video, where we  -  the woke brigade  -  are getting "illiterate" hashtag cancelled.

What is (Il)Literacy?
Let's start with defining "literacy."
We often use it to mean the ability to read and write, but it can also mean knowledge in a specific area (like internet literacy or saying someone is "politically literate"). These definitions are the most common ones, and there's nothing...super wrong with them, but I'd like to use the more nuanced definition during this video.
Here's UNESCOs definition: "Beyond its conventional concept as a set of reading, writing and counting skills, literacy is now understood as a means of identification, understanding, interpretation, creation, and communication in an increasingly digital, text-mediated, information-rich and fast-changing world."
The Program for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies defines literacy as "understanding, evaluating, using and engaging with written text to participate in the society, to achieve one's goals and to develop one's knowledge and potential."
Another definition, this one from the Ministry of Education of Alberta, Canada, says that literacy is "the ability, confidence and willingness to engage with language to acquire, construct and communicate meaning in all aspects of daily living."
So literacy isn't just the ability to read and write, but wanting to do it, being confident in it, and using reading and writing to do things for yourself and for your society.
Literacy is complex, but it's also fragile. Reading and writing aren't skills like...learning how to ride a bike. Once you learn how to ride a bike, you don't forget it. That's...y'know...the thing people say.
Literacy is more like...math. So, you have the basics  -  addition, subtraction, multiplication, etc.  -  and everything kind of grows off of that  -  y'know, you can't really do calculus without knowing algebra first. But if you don't constantly practice those concepts, you lose them.
I mean, take me as an example. I took AP Calculus in high school, but I haven't practiced those skills in... years. And now... Please don't ask me to calculate the rate that a snowball is melting. I will cry.
But, not to brag, but I do remember how to do addition and subtraction. And I remember...most of my times tables. Those are no problem. Because they're the basics, and I practice them every time I make a budget or calculate how much weight my puppy has gained since last month.
[insert Wren pics]
The same is true of reading and writing. Even if someone learns letters and words and putting them together, all the language stuff...if they don't practice that skill, they lose it.
So, to recap, literacy is reading and writing for a purpose, used to interact with the world, and it's a skill that takes a long time to learn, requires constant practice, and can be forgotten if it isn't used.
 
U.S. Literacy Levels
So what does this have to do with Shawna and the Facebook incident (which would actually be a really great name for a pop punk album)? Well, to understand Shawna, we need to understand literacy levels in the United States. See, we have a literacy problem.
I'm not going to get into the whole history of literacy studies, but basically, there are 5 levels of literacy. Level 5 is, like, PhD, award-winning author level, Level 0 is basically not being able to read or write anything in the language, and Level 3 is what we consider the minimum for everyday competency in today's world  -  think, like, being able to follow recipes, writing letters, sending emails, etc.
[insert screencap of table]
What percentage of US adults do you think fall below this Level 3 threshold? 5%? 10%?
According to an ongoing literacy study, the Program for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC), in the United States, FIFTY TWO PERCENT of adults have a literacy level below Level 3. That means over half of adults don't have the reading and writing skills they need to be productive members of society.
[insert screencap of graph]
 
Illiteracy and Social Justice
But what does this have to do with social justice? I mean, yeah, a lot of adults don't have the skills required to be "functional" in society, but does that really mean that this is a systemic issue?
Well, let's talk a little bit about what illiteracy actually looks like. Now, like I mentioned before, illiteracy is more complicated than just "knowing how to read and write."
The Snowball Effect
If you are "illiterate," you lack a lot of fundamental skills, and it permeates every single part of your life. Because yeah, it means not being able to read research papers and write blog posts...
But it's also...struggling in school, so you drop out.
You try to get a job, but you can't fill out the application. So you try to file for unemployment, but you can't navigate the site.
When you get to the store, you can't read the ingredients to know which type of cereal is safe for your son with a peanut allergy.
If your son goes to the hospital, you can't read his chart or the surgery waiver or the medical bills.
You have to ask your neighbors to read your mail for you, which gives them access to some of your most personal and private information. You needed their help when you moved in, too, because you couldn't read your lease contract.
And maybe you can't leave your abusive partner because you can't get your driver's license because you can't take the written portion of the test.
These scenarios are real, everyday things that adult literacy learners have to deal with. And when you're stuck in poverty, if you don't have a voice, you do everything you can to get by. And sometimes that means crime. This is what people mean when they talk about the "school-to-prison pipeline".
If you struggle with reading and writing, it snowballs and affects every. single. part. of your life. It is a systemic issue.
"Illiterate" is an Ableist, Classist Slur
On top of all of that, adult literacy learners also have to deal with the stigma attached to their literacy level. "Illiterate" is an insult.
"Illiterate" is another way to call someone "stupid". It's what you throw at someone who makes a spelling or grammar mistake; it's what you use to describe people you think are dumb or poor or just rural, inbred, WV rednecks. It's just another flavor of ableism, with a little dash of classism and racism thrown in just for funsies.
Literacy learners are treated similarly to a lot of disabled folks. They're ignored, made fun of, silenced. But social justice and advocacy groups have been fighting for accessibility and inclusivity for disabled people for a while now.
So why isn't that the case for adult literacy learners? Why is "illiterate" still an insult, even in so-called "inclusive" spaces?
Well...there are two possible reasons:
Maybe We Don't Know About Them
Reason A  -  People aren't aware of just how many adult literacy learners there are. We often think that "illiterate adults" is a really small group, but remember: More than half of adults in the United States fall below the functional level.
So...if there are so many, why don't we know about them?
Well, because they often do everything they can to hide their illiteracy, because when they show it, we shame them for asking for help and then tell them that they shouldn't have kids.  (Which, by the way, is eugenics. It's just eugenics.)
You know these people...you just don't know they're struggling.
On top of that, adult literacy learners are functionally muzzled. I mean...how can you write a blog or post on Facebook or Twitter if you don't know how to write? How can you articulate the complexities of your identity and your struggles and your hopes and dreams if your vocabulary is only a couple-hundred words deep? How can you read about the lives of people like you if you never made it past a third-grade reading level?
So... That's Reason A. Reason B...is a little more pessimistic.
Maybe We Do, But We Just Don't Care
There is the possibility that people do know that adult literacy learners exist, but they just don't care...because they see it as a personal failing.
This is very much the capitalist, "pull yourself up by your bootstraps" mentality, just applied to knowledge. Your education is within your own power, so if you don't know something or can't do something, it's your fault, and you should feel bad.
We like to make fun of people for being "stupid" and "lazy." We want to feel good for being better and smarter and harder working than the people around us, because if we are better and smarter and harder working, then maybe we can win the capitalism lottery.
This is the lens many people use when looking at literacy learners: "They're just lazy." "They wouldn't be so poor if they just learned how to read."
But it's not laziness or stupidity (partially because IQ is...fake...and also built on eugenics.) There are lots of reasons why adults struggle with literacy. According to The Literacy Foundation, some of the most common risk factors for low literacy levels are: having parents who struggle with literacy, a lack of books at home, dropping out of school (usually so they can go to work), living in poverty, having physical and learning disabilities, and language barriers.
[insert screenshot]
None of those are things that are fully within your own control. Being illiterate is not some sort of personal shortcoming.
People struggle with literacy because the system failed them.
Cause and Effect
Okay, so even if it isn't a personal thing, it's still the cause of social issues, right?
"It's the illiterate folks' fault that the economy is in the trash. It's the illiterate folks' fault that Trump was elected. It's the illiterate folks' fault that...fill in the blank."
Ignoring the fact that people who struggle with literacy are often unable to vote  -  which is literally disenfranchisement  -  this is a classic case of mixing up cause and effect.
Yeah, things might be better if every single person were Level 5 literate and the most informed on every topic, but that's not the fault of the people who are living below the poverty line, who couldn't go to school because they had to work to support their families, who have visual or cognitive impairments, who don't have any support network, let alone a support network full of people who nurture an appreciation for reading and writing.
These people are not the causes of social ills. They are the victims of them. They're stuck in cycles of poverty, they're tied down by systemic racism and sexism, they're harmed by a lack of access to healthcare and education. And most of them want help. But they're just met with ridicule and shame.
 
The Fix
Now, this looks pretty bleak, right? I mean, over half of all adults are unable to do a ton of things that are important to keeping our society running well, and a lot of the causes for why they ended up there in the first place are systemic issues that are kind of baked into the way our country is organized, and...
It feels hopeless.
But... there are ways out of this. There are ways for adult literacy learners to gain literacy. There are groups who work out of community centers who work on teaching adults reading and writing skills, along with other literacy-related life skills like applying for job or housing or driver's licenses.
And there's stuff that the rest of us can do to help, too.
One of the easiest things to do is donate to your local literacy center. I have a link down in the description of a site where you can search to see if you have a literacy center in your area. If you don't have one nearby, you can donate to your local library. You can volunteer, and do outreach.
I've put a bunch of resources in the description, with links to various foundations and organizations and places where you can donate or find information about literacy, so be sure to check those out.
There are also little everyday choices you can make that make the lives of literacy learners way, way easier. When possible, use simple and straightforward words and sentence constructions to convey your ideas. (This is also just a good idea in general.)
If you're interacting with someone and they want to read something later, or somewhere else, let them. If they want you to read something for them...just do it. Don't pressure them to perform a literate task in front of you.
And remember: Adult literacy learners aren't stupid. They're often smart and driven and kind and they're just frustrated with the world because it was built for literate people, but not built to help people out of illiteracy.
The best thing you can do is just...be nice. Don't make assumptions about people's literacy levels. Fight that gut reaction to make fun of people when they make "simple mistakes" on the internet. Call people out when they use "illiterate" as an insult.
And...if someone asks for help with installing their kid's car seat... Just fucking help them, okay?
 
Conclusion
The story of literacy learners is a story of disenfranchisement, ableism, and the ills of capitalism.
They are being oppressed under all the same kinds of structures that oppress people of color, LGBTQ folks, disabled people, poor people, neurodivergent people...and everyone else who's held down by this shitty system.
I don't know what the solution is  -  I don't think it's something that can be fixed overnight or by one YouTube video. I think it's gonna take something...bigger. But until we can make the necessary systemic changes, we need to start by changing ourselves and doing what we can to include adult literacy learners in our progressivism.
I want to leave you with a quote from the International Literacy Association:
"The ability to read, write, and communicate connects people to one another and empowers them to achieve things they never thought possible. Communication and connection are the basis of who we are and how we live together and interact with the world."
This...is something worth fighting for. So let's start fighting.
 
End Crawl
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video!
I'm sorry this one was a little on the longer end, but I am just really passionate about literacy and also the hypocrisy of shitty online leftists, so...
Anyway, be sure to like and subscribe and do all those YouTube things.
If you want more of me, you can come join us on Patreon, where memberships start at only $2 a month. You can get lots of fun stuff like polls and seeing videos early and getting custom-written poems by ME, a real published poet. So if that sounds like something you'd be interested in, you can check that out in the description below! You can also go follow me on Twitter AT Zoe underscore The Bee, but...I only ever tweet at like 6:30 in the morning, so... y'know just weigh your options.
Anyway, thank you again for watching...and until next time, stay safe, stay warm, and I will see yall again soon, I hope. Bye folks!
 
Sources:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/answer-sheet/wp/2016/11/01/hiding-in-plain-sight-the-adult-literacy-crisis/
https://en.unesco.org/themes/literacy
https://education.alberta.ca/literacy-and-numeracy/literacy/everyone/what-is-literacy/
https://nces.ed.gov/surveys/piaac/skillsmap/
https://nces.ed.gov/surveys/piaac/current_results.asp
https://www.fondationalphabetisation.org/en/
https://www.fondationalphabetisation.org/en/causes-of-illiteracy/illiterate-individuals-are-here-among-us/
https://www.literacypittsburgh.org/the-challenge/
https://www.nld.org/
 
All my literacy books
 
 
 

Kindness | A Little Chat

Before I begin, I want to first let you all know that this video is brought to you by the Eldritch horrors known as Zowber, Sigwa, and Ryan Ofori (let me know if I'm pronouncing that right, please!)  -  thank you, thank you, thank you.
Alright, on to the video.

So...you are all very nice. I constantly see comments talking about how "authentic" I seem, how "chill" things are, and how calming my voice is -- which is very much a surprise to me, I don't understand it, I think my voice is grating and makes me sound like a 13-year-old.
And thank you, for all of that. But I want to talk about one type of comment, in particular, that I see most often. There are dozens, maybe even hundreds now -- of comments on how nice I seem. Or how compassionate or understanding or kind I am. 
And, again, thank you, so, so, so much. That is kind of the ~vibe~ that I'm going for. I really do want to be the patient, maternal teacher in the cozy sweaters with the cuddly cats. 
But I want to look at this a little deeper. Because, while I've always been like this, as long as I can remember, I don't necessarily think it's a good thing...
I think that a lot of my "kindness" comes from anxiety and rejection sensitive dysphoria and just...constantly wanting to be liked by everyone. Wanting...affirmation that I'm doing things right and that I'm not causing harm to anyone. I am hyper-aware of how other people see me, and I try extremely hard to be seen as a helpful, happy, kind person. Because if I can't be seen like that...I'd rather not be seen at all.
I have always worried about hurting people, about accidentally hurting feelings or offending friends and family.  When I was little, I would save all of my birthday and Christmas and other holiday cards and keep them in a big box under my bed. I saved every single one. Because I thought that if someone found out I threw away their $2 Hallmark card that they would think I hated them, and it would break their heart.
I also made sure to rotate which of my stuffed animals slept on my bed with me, so that they wouldn't think I was playing favorites, because it would make them sad if they weren't my favorite inanimate, stuffed toy.
Even now, 20-plus years later, I still have this seed of "do no harm" inside me. I'm a pacifist. I'm a bleeding-heart anti-war pro-social programs hippie. 
And, for a while, I thought that was how everyone should be. I was kind of...like...the tone police. I thought that if everyone was just nicer that that would solve all our problems. I thought that there was no excuse for violence, ever; I thought that calm conversations were all you needed to change someone's mind, even about really big, serious things. I thought kindness was the solution to...pretty much everything. 
You know... "Do no harm," means that you have to be nice to everyone, say "yes" to everything, smile and nod and be positive....no matter the cost...right?
But now... I realize that the saying isn't just "Do no harm." I realize there's a second line: "Do no harm...but take no shit."
For a lot of my life, until...very very recently, actually, I was...kind of a doormat. I didn't know how to say "no" to things. I thought that "no" meant that I was rude or mean or lazy. I thought that I had to say "yes" to everything to prove that I liked people, that I could be helpful, that people could rely on me.
And...what I've learned since then...where I'm at now, I understand that kindness isn't when you say "yes" to everything. Kindness is understanding that other people are...like...full, complex, complicated humans. It's empathizing with people who disagree with you. It's patience and forgiveness.
But the most important thing I learned is that...kindness isn't just about other people. Kindness is about you too.
And that might sound silly and obvious, but, I mean, really think about what that means. Being kind to yourself.
It means being patient and forgiving and having empathy and understanding...for yourself. It's forgiving yourself when you screw up, it's...not holding yourself to some cosmically-high standards and falling into self-loathing when you inevitably don't meet those standards.
Kindness is about standing up for yourself. It's about learning how to say "no" when you need to. It's fighting for what you believe in.
And I know that kindness isn't the solution to everything. You can't...stop a whole fascist regime through the power of friendship. And sometimes...when you've tried kindness, and it doesn't work, you have to resort to other solutions.
And I'm still a pacifist, I'm still a bleeding-heart...everything, but I think I'm...learning. And I'm...trying to do better and learn and grow and change when I need to.
And it's hard, and I get...frustrated with myself, sometimes when I'm not acting...however I think I should be.
Kindness is still a fundamental part of who I am. I still strive to be kind and understanding and patient and empathetic in everything I do. But I also understand that all of that also applies to me. And I have to learn to be kind to myself, too.
So...I guess what I want you to get out of this, if you take anything away from watching this... Be kind to yourself. Be kind to others. Know that kindness is an important virtue, but it's also not the end-all-be-all  -  it doesn't solve everything. It can't.
So...ultimately...don't forget that the saying has two lines:
Do no harm, but take no shit.
Until next time...stay safe, stay warm, and I will see y'all again soon, I hope. Bye, folks 😊

What is "Literature"?| A Professor Explains
(in-Video Title: Firing the Literary Canon)
Thesis: These are all the things we can take into account to decide what fits in the literary canon (beauty, transportation, impact on culture). But then the question comes: Who decides? Who decides what is beautiful, whose stories are worth listening to? The cultural impact thing is determined by power structures and will only self-perpetuate its own values -- there will never be anything new. So if all those things are useless, then it doesn't make sense to just keep expanding the canon, or to totally dissolve it (because we do still need to make decisions about what we teach, why we teach it, and how we teach it). What we need to do instead is think of the canon like a web -- think of it as constantly shifting and evolving. We can also focus more on how we read, and less on what we read.
Intro
I used to be an English teacher, and one of the most common questions I got was "Why do we have to read all these books?" And I didn't just get this question from my students, but also from friends and family who wanted to understand why their adolescence was also filled with reading dusty old books.
This isn't just a common question, but also an important one. Because it is worth thinking about why we have to learn certain things. So, today, I want to take a look at what it means for something to be "literature" and how we decide what is (or isn't) literary. 
And just as a disclaimer, I am not going to argue that the literary canon should be totally abolished, or that we need to instate a counter-canon. I'm not arguing for or against The Canon  -  I just want to talk about the process of how things "become canon" in the first place. With that out of the way, let's jump in, shall we?
Literary Canon - What and Why?
When we talk about "literature" in an academic sense, we're usually talking about what's called the "literary canon" - which is not a very cool piece of literate artillery, but which is basically all the things we think of as "classics". (And, throughout this video, when I talk about the "literary canon" I'm talking specifically about the "Western canon," because that's generally what people refer to when they talk about "The Canon")
The canon is generally seen to be made up of the texts worthy of teaching in our schools (Role of Lit. Canon, 11). One poet and critic from the 1800s, named Matthew Arnold, said that we need to be teaching "the best which has been thought and said in the world"  -  which then prompts the question, "What is the best that has been thought and said in the world?" How do we figure out what that means?
And this question sounds really big and...kind of absurd on its surface, right? I mean, try doing this with any other art form. Like...music. If I asked you to create a musical canon where you had to choose 50 songs from all artists across all time and all cultures, that'd be near impossible to do.
You'd have to separate it by genre or by country or by time period or something, right? But with the literary canon we don't do that. We have everything from Shakespeare (a British poet and playwright from the late 1500s-early 1600s), to F. Scott Fitzgerald (an American novelist from the early 1900s), to Homer (an ancient Greek epic poet from 800 BC). 
So when you're distilling down literally everything ever written into just a few-dozen must-read titles, you have to have some kind of limiting factor that determines what is and is not in the canon. Well, this has been attempted by literary theorists, but...it's a lot. And it's kind of boring, to be totally honest. 
Suffice it to say, there are a lot of different opinions about what is and should be valued in texts. And while I'm not going to go over all schools of literary theory, I will talk about some of the more common ones that we're more familiar with. I want to talk about the ones that -- if you asked an English teacher what makes something "literary" -- they might use to answer your question.
So...what makes something literary? Well, a lot of people argue that literature is literature because it has had some kind of powerful effect on culture. Books are literary when they redefine genres and spawn countless references or retellings. Think, like, how O Brother, Where Art Thou is a modern version of The Odyssey, or how, like, 45% of all movies are just adaptations of Shakespeare plays.
But does this mean that literature classes can never read any contemporary works? Because it takes a while to tell if something is going to have a real, material effect on a culture. And does this angle include popular fiction? Because Fifty Shades of Grey definitely had an effect on the culture of the U.S. circa 2013, but that doesn't mean it's literary. If we only read Shakespeare because a lot of things reference Shakespeare, should we also be teaching memes and pop music because a lot of our other art references it? 
Other folks argue that literature is literary because of what it can teach us. Literature, these critics say, is about teaching lessons and imparting values and sharing experiences. 1984 was about the dangers of fascism and authoritarianism, something that George Orwell had seen firsthand during the Spanish Civil War. And To Kill a Mockingbird, the book we all had to read in 8th grade, teaches us that we need to...climb into people's skin (gross).
But when you're focused on experiences, this either excludes stories about marginalized people or tokenizes minority writers. Zora Neale Hurston wrote about her experiences as a Black woman living in the American south in the early and mid-1900s, but you're lucky if you read her work in an American Literature course. You're much more likely to find her work buried in an "African American Literature" course.
Think of it like this: If you want a story about the normal, default American experience, you go to a man. The only reason you'd go to a woman is if you want a story about the female American experience. Black writers and disabled writers and LGBTQ writers are often pressured to tell stories about the Black or disabled or queer experience, because minority writers are often only seen as valuable when they represent the whole group they're a part of. 
Now, other folks have argued that the answer to what makes something literary is its beauty or aesthetics. Literature is literature because it is beautifully written. Authors in the literary canon are in there because they use language in interesting, aesthetically pleasing, unconventional ways.
Literary critic and noted canon fan Harold Bloom argues that this aesthetic appeal goes hand-in-hand with strangeness or a kind of new-ness. Basically, something is literary when it does something new and interesting, using language or structure or theme in never-before-seen ways.
As Bloom states: "One breaks into the canon only by aesthetic strength, which is constituted primarily of [a]...mastery of figurative language, originality, cognitive power, knowledge, [and] exuberance of diction". So...y'know... You use words real good.
But these are all imperfect answers to the question of literary-ness. All these literary theory lenses have their merits, but none of them has a satisfying answer. As scholar Terry Eagleton puts it: Literature isn't "some inherent quality or set of qualities displayed by certain kinds of writing...[or] some constant set of inherent features. ... There is no `essence' of literature whatsoever." (8)
So...if these internal properties - like aesthetics or new-ness - aren't what decides what is and isn't literary, then there must be some kind of external force that decides. Or, to put it another way, Professor John M. Ellis suggests that we think of literature like we think of weeds: 
"Weeds are not particular kinds of plants, but just any kind of plant which for some reason or another a gardener does not want around. Perhaps `literature' means something like the opposite: any kind of writing which for some reason or another somebody values highly. ...'literature' and `weed' are functional rather than ontological terms: they tell us about what we do, not about the fixed being of things. They tell us about the role of a text or a thistle in a social context, its relations with and differences from its surroundings, the ways it behaves, the purposes it may be put to and the human practices clustered around it."
But if literature is like weeds, then we have to ask... Who is the gardener? Who is it that decides which texts get fertilizer and sunshine, and which texts get ripped out and burned? If the value of texts comes down to their aesthetics or how groundbreaking they are... Who decides what it means to be aesthetically powerful or interesting or strange? Who decides when the ground has been broken? Who decides whose stories get told?
Who Gets to Decide?
This is a question that is surprisingly hard to answer. Because it's not one we stop to ask very often, right?  We just know (or think we know) that some texts are part of the canon. They just are. There's no question.
This is actually by design. And I don't mean that there's a group of academic elites in a smoke-filled room somewhere who decide on the canon and hire hitmen to take out anyone who questions how the canon came to be.
What I mean is that the canon is a structure -- a system -- that we're working within, and it's become so integral to other systems (like our entire English education system) that it's gotten big. Too big to see from the inside. So we've forgotten it's there. Out of sight, out of mind.
And what this means for English teachers is that the canon has become an invisible guardrail. You only know it's there when you try to cross it. If you want to teach using a book from outside the canon -- if you try to reach your hand past the guardrail -- you have to justify it. You feel those constraints of the system.
But as long as you stay within the system, as long as you don't try to reach your arm past the railing, it's invisible. You have to justify going outside the canon, but the canon doesn't have to justify its existence to you. The value of its texts is taken for granted. Of course those texts are valuable; they're in the canon. They've been taught for years.
So who is it that's keeping this system intact? Well, everyone who has anything to do with books in any capacity, anywhere. The system is reinforced by publishing houses, who have to decide which books they think are most publishable, and then also which books get the most marketing budget, which helps to determine what you buy.
And what you buy is based partially on that marketing, but also on a desire to have the social status that comes from having read "the classics" or the hot new literary darlings from Oprah's book club. Being able to quote Shakespeare and Cicero and Dostoyevsky is a type of cultural capital. Or, as scholar John Guillory puts it, familiarity with the literary canon functions as "a kind of knowledge-capital whose possession can be displayed upon request and which thereby entitles its possessor to the cultural and material rewards of the well-educated person."
If you know all the right stuff, you are seen as smarter or more cultured. And so, because you want to be seen as those things (because don't we all want to be, deep down?), you check all the boxes and read all the right stuff and become ingrained in this self-perpetuating system.
By being a part of the system and buying the books the system says you should buy, you affect publishing trends, and those publishing trends affect what writers write. And what writers write is also impacted by critics - who decide what is quality writing, what is even worth reviewing in the first place - and by teachers, who taught those writers how to write and who teach what even counts as "real" writing.
When teachers teach specific books, they're reinforcing to students what kind of writing - and, thus, what kind of books - are valuable. But even what teachers can teach is also shaped by these systems, which decide what is worth putting in textbooks and anthologies. Who decides what goes in these big collections? Who decides that?
All these systems. These systems decide what is publishable, what is "valid," what is safe, what critics have decided is worthy. Have you ever thought about where textbooks get their idea of what "good writing advice" is? It's what gets published. But what gets published is shaped by how writers write, which is shaped by how writers are taught and by what critics think is "good" writing and by what is publishable and what publishing houses think you want to buy and you want to buy it because it makes you cool and knowledgable and now you see how this is a whole fucking cycle.
There's actually a word for this - this system where everything is connected and everything feeds into everything else, but that's too big to really see: Ideology. Terry Eagleton describes ideology as "the largely concealed structure of values which informs and underlies our factual statements;...the ways in which what we say and believe connects with the power-structure and the power-relations of the society we live in."
So, ideology - all these structures, all these systems that are working together to keep the literary canon cycle alive - mean that the canon isn't just a list of texts. It's an ecosystem. Or, as critic Robert J Aston says,  "the teaching of literature and the literary canon...do not exist in some transcendental, unchanging realm, but come about through the material operations of texts, teachers, students, and other entities." So, long story short - What is "literature"? It's whatever our systems decide to uphold. Systems - for better or worse - decide what is and is not "literature".

Transition to Armchair Egyptology Section
But the thing about the literary canon is that it doesn't just represent what we value - it's not just a list of our favorite books - it also reflects our culture back to us. And that reflection is an implicit approval that says "Hey, this story is valid and valuable," which then reinforces the very structures that created those stories and decided they were valuable in the first place.
And these systems don't just shape our literature, either. There are whole structures devoted to shaping our culture. Like this book, The Dictionary of Cultural Literacy, which was one guy's awful attempt at creating a cultural canon of all the stuff a person should know to be a good citizen, or whatever.
But I'm no culture expert, so I want to bring in history nerd and friend-of-the-channel Armchair Egyptology to discuss all the stuff he knows about the intersection between culture, history, and power. And also Ancient Aliens? I was promised Ancient Aliens.
AE's Section
The idea of a canon of geniuses isn't restricted to the question, "who decides what counts as literature?". There's a wider problem of "what makes something culture". And by `culture' I don't mean... painting, music, theatre. Well, those too. I mean that every culture on the planet decides, either through direct enforcement or the passive power of memes, what counts as part of that culture, and what counts as something other.
One major place where cultural identity and literature collide is history. History isn't an objective record of events that have taken place. Even if you had access to every primary source from every era, you wouldn't have an objective, true record: Trump's tweets were a primary source for his time as President, but hopefully we all know the limited veracity of those. History, like any written account fact or fiction, is constructed around a desired narrative. And I certainly include oral history, which has a far greater capacity for, shall we say, flexibility, as each new telling owes as little as needed to the tellings of the past. But in both oral and written histories, there is a necessary point of view, and just because most history we're familiar with today was written down by someone doesn't make it any more reliable.
But `history' is a serious academic discipline, it can't be just... made up, right? Well, of course good history has a grounding in provable facts, but centuries of people lending the word "history" itself authority over words like `legend' and `myth' has had an interesting side-effect. One prominent example of this centres on the so-called History channel. With a name like that, you evoke authority. Here is presented history, and that is a word most of us take fairly uncritically. The experts who appear on a channel called History inherit some of this authority, the same way an educator inherits some of their authority from the school that employs them.
This guy is Giorgio Tsoukalos. He's... I guess I shouldn't make specific allegations but he might be a fraud, a grifter, and a white supremacist. We'll never know for sure, but we do know he isn't a historian any more than I'm an Egyptologist, maybe even less so. You probably know him as `the aliens guy' [I think his Twitter and Instagram even feature this phrase?] and we tend to make fun of his baffling origin theories for ancient buildings, and his eccentric appearance.
The problem is, the authority bestowed upon him by History's large audience gives his baffling theories a lot of cultural weight. The show that made him famous, Ancient Aliens, was watched by millions of people. That's authority. That's the kind of authority a teacher gets from the respect of their students. And that authority should bring responsibility.
With an audience in the millions, you can instil any values you want, or you can carelessly fail to curb our civilisation's worst excesses. It isn't actually very funny to say that aliens built the Pyramids, because underlying the guy with the wild hair is a deep principle that there are such things as primitive peoples, who cannot have done the things they obviously have. In my own video, the partner of this one, I talk a lot about museums. Well, museums have this same responsibility, albeit with a smaller audience in some cases, but they have a power that a documentary, be it a film or series on the History channel, or a Youtube video, doesn't have: a museum can mutate. A documentary or a Youtube video exists once published: a museum is a result of ongoing decisions about what is worthy of showing.
Zoe's talked about how we reach a position of trust in an institution, how we grant authority through our trust, and for something like a museum that trust can be, and often is, wildly abused. Usually, and it's important that nobody thinks I mean anything close to universally, but usually, museums  -  particularly prominent publicly funded museums such as the Smithsonian or the Louvre or the British Museum  -  serve to uphold a version of their surrounding culture that conforms to the status quo. This creates a cultural canon, the same way schools and colleges create a literary canon. Choices have to be made when picking what a museum displays, and those choices will be made based on a number of factors. Each exhibit's projected popularity is a big one, and generally the status quo is popular... or it wouldn't be the status quo. Or at least it's popular among the museum-going minority of the public, who tend to be affluent and college educated. By and large, they aren't visiting to see their place in society challenged, and that means museums have a vested interest in not asking questions like "why do white people have disproportionate representation in Congress?" and "why are so many people starving in the richest country on the planet?". And that state funding isn't a sign of neutrality either; it can always be made conditional. The UK government is hell-bent on `promoting British values', whatever that's supposed to mean, through every educational channel it can think of. The British Museum is a dragon's hoard of looted imperial artefacts, and none except for a tiny minority mention anything about the violence or criminality that brought those artefacts to London.
I think museums have the ability, and I'd even argue that they have the duty, to see our cultures as diverse as they truly are. Or as Zoe's already put it, "whose stories get told?" To stop proclaiming "this is the Culture; the less you have in common with this, the less part of our society you are" and to start saying "our culture is made up of many parts, come and see your part alongside the rest". Because canon isn't just a useless idea when it comes to defining an entire culture; it's an actively toxic idea. We need our museums, and our schools, at every level, to be the mirror that shows us the truth when we look into it: for good or ill.

If you want to hear more about this, you can get more of it from his channel, which is in a card up here and linked down below. We've actually done companion videos, so there's a partner video over on his channel where he talks about how museums function in the same sort of way the literary canon does to uphold cultural structures, and I have my own little tangent in his video, so when this video is over go ahead and check that out and show him some love!
How do we Escape?
Literature as a category is determined by "ideology" - by this system of all the interconnected parts of society. But if "literature" is basically just "whatever the system values," then, as Terry Eagleton says, "we can drop once and for all the illusion that the category `literature' is `objective'... Literature, in the sense of a set of works of assured and unalterable value, distinguished by certain shared inherent properties, does not exist." (9).
But this doesn't mean I want to just throw the baby out with the bathwater. I'm not arguing for a total dissolution of the current canon or replacing Shakespeare, or destroying all classic literature forever. Shakespeare is important, and I don't want to burn books by old white guys. I actually like a lot of books by old white guys. Kurt Vonnegut? Love him. I have literally every single one of his published works. And he was an old white guy who fought in World War II. Like, peak boomer.
A lot of the books here in my...reading rainbow...are "literature". And if you're interested in a tour of this beautiful bookshelf, that'll be available for my Honey Bee Members and Trash Panda Patrons in the next couple days!
But anyway, I don't want to destroy the current canon, but I also don't want to just add to the canon. Because if the canon becomes so large as to include all published works, it's useless. But if I'm not saying we should expand the list, then...what's the alternative? 
To answer that we need to stop thinking of the canon as a list. The literary canon isn't a masterlist of THE BEST LITERATURE OF ALLLLL TIIIIIIME - it's more like...a spiderweb, as suggested by scholar Ruth Vins, where you have all of these overlapping, intersecting, connected "stories in dialogue with other stories".
And when we start thinking of the canon as a spiderweb, we can see how it's not a question of inclusion and exclusion - the web is infinite, it can hold everything - it's a question of finding connections. It's about seeing the relationships between pieces of literature, and between those texts and our lives. And one of the great things about this model of the canon is that it's malleable.
The canon is a living amalgamation of items revealed through their inclusion in school curricula. There are no immutable properties of texts that make them canon worthy. The canon isn't prescriptive, but descriptive. That means we have the power over it. We can decide how it works. We control it, not the other way around.
So what this means for teaching is that we can choose what to read. Because it's not about the value of the texts themselves. It's about their connections - with each other and with us and with our culture. And Professor Gerald Graff actually argues that how we read is far more important than what we read: 
"Whether we assign a classic text or the most frivolous piece of pop culture, if we do our job as academics, we inevitably make the object hard, since we expect students to think, speak, and write about the text in an intellectually rigorous and disciplined way. ... What creates difficulty . . . is not just the object of study but the kind of question being asked about it. ... The word "the" becomes difficult when its historical development and grammar are studied by philologists or linguists...and a neo-Marxist analysis of Vanna White's autobiography Vanna Speaks, one that emphasized, say, the commodification of the self under postmodern capitalism, might be more challenging than any number of analyses of weightier tomes than Vanna's."
What it all comes down to is that instead of teaching students that there is a list of works that must be read - whether that list is all dusty tomes of old white guys, or whether it's a decolonized bookshelf - instead of that, we should pull back the curtain and show them why some books have been canonized instead of others.
We should teach them about these structures and systems that work together to make decisions about literature. We should be transparent about how and why we decide which books to bring into the classroom. We should give them the skills and agency and space to make their own decisions about what they believe. We should ask them hard questions, get them to think critically about everything they read, not just James Joyce and Shakespeare.
And isn't that just more fun? Instead of being handed all these books and being told "read these, it's good for you," we could be questioning those old, curmudgeonly gray-beards - saying, "but...why should I?" and actually pressing them for an answer. We could actually take our learning into our own hands and confront the invisible structures all around us.
But hey, that's just a theory... A literary theory. Thanks for watching.

Outro
Thanks so much for watching! I hope you all enjoyed it, and if you did, be sure to like, subscribe, comment, share, all those YouTube things. A huge thank-you to the Armchair Egyptologist for his section in this video, as well as agreeing to do this awesome collaboration project. As I mentioned earlier, he has made a companion video to this one, and I show up in it to talk about my teaching experience and academic authority, so be sure to check that out and show him lots of love!
I want to give another big "thanks" to TheLitCritGuy who gave me a crash course in literary theory and made sure what I was saying was like....actually accurate. I also have his channel linked below as well!
I also want to give a huge thank-you to all my Patrons and Members whose names you should see scrolling here beside me. And an extra-special thank-you to A Tasty Snack, Adam, Akita Fishikiyama, Al Sweigert, Dylan, Jameson Huddle, Robert Bradford, and Science Punk Sellout. 
If you'd like to join them and get some cool perks like behind-the-scenes videos, exclusive livestreams, and that bookshelf tour I mentioned earlier, then come join us on Patreon, linked in the description, or become a channel member by clicking the "join" button right next to the "subscribe" button.
And finally, we have our Patron poem of the video. For Elise, this is "Dear Elise"

Dear Elise,

Behind all great men there are women
Behind every artist, we're there.

Without us, their songs would be soulless
Each line would be frigid and bare.

Yet they wipe our names from their pages
And tuck us aside, out of view

So, sister, step out of his shadow
And dare to become your own muse
Working Title: How Capitalism Broke Minecraft
Intro
This video is not about Minecraft. We will be talking about the game, but if you don't know anything about it, that's okay. Because ultimately, this video is about profiteering, copyright violations, sketchy scam artists, and exploitation. And it's also about how I was a part of this system. So, put on your iron helmet, get those diamond pickaxes ready, and let's dig in.
The Video
A few weeks ago, I ran across a video by RetroGamingNow, called "The Minecraft Scam No One is Talking About," which I have linked in the description and highly recommend checking out. 
The gist of the video is that RetroGamingNow was alerted to the existence of a listing on Amazon for a book whose title was the same as a title he'd used for one of his more popular videos. He checked out the book and found that it was basically a transcript of his video, including screenshots on each page, and the cover was even the thumbnail of a different Minecraft YouTube video.
After he learned about this, he went down a rabbithole and discovered that it wasn't just his video that had been snatched and plagiarized, but there were over 20 other "books" that were just transcripts of popular Minecraft YouTube videos, all written by Firstname "Miner" Lastname. And all their titles were simply the title of the YouTube video they had plagiarized, plus some SEO word-salad to help the listing's analytics.
The creator of RetroGamingNow theorized that the books were made using bots, or some kind of automated system, since they obviously hadn't been proof-read. There were basic spelling errors, sentences that just didn't make any sense, and the screenshots they used on each page didn't always match the subject matter, and were sometimes so dark you couldn't make anything out.
The only evidence that there was any human hand in the books was the fact that, for all the videos they transcribed and printed, they also cut out the intros and outros - any time that the actual video creator referenced themselves or talked about YouTube, or asked viewers to like and subscribe, was just missing.
Clearly, there was some person making these decisions, right? Well, it was hard to tell. And even through all his research, RGN wasn't able to find anything definitive either way. He ended the video by just asking viewers not to buy any of these books, and to help to spread this information around so that creators whose videos were plagiarized could alert Amazon and have the listings taken down, because they're clearly violating copyright law.
But other than that... There hasn't really been a resolution to any of this, and the people who profited off of someone else's work probably aren't going to face any real consequences, outside of maybe not being able to sell books on Amazon anymore. So it's kind of fizzled out...
"Okay, Zoe" you might be saying, "Sure, this sucks, but what does it have to do with you?" Well, that's a good question...

The Book
Alright, so before I get into how I'm mixed up in this whole Minecraft content theft stuff, we need to set the scene a little bit. Imagine: it's the summer of 2015, and little Zoe Bee is a college student in-between terms, looking for work. She's living with her boyfriend who has a Very Important Job at a Very Important Company, but she wants to make a little money to be able to buy nice things like...video games. And a WiiU. (Yes, I was one of the 12 people worldwide who actually bought a WiiU).
But at this point in my life, I didn't have my driver's license yet - I was very much a late bloomer when it came to driving. So I had to find a job that I could do online. I'd done tutoring work in school, but now that it was summer break, there weren't a lot of folks who needed help with writing essays and stuff, so I needed to find something else.
That's when I discovered fiverr. Now, those of you who have been around YouTube for a few years may recognize fiverr as "that freelance platform that PewDiePie used to destroy his career." But if you don't know what fiverr is, it's an online marketplace that connects customers to freelancers who fulfill gigs - jobs that traditionally started at $5 (hence the name "fiverr").
So when I found fiverr, I felt like it was perfect. I could set my own hours and rates, decide which jobs to accept, and I could do all of it from the comfort of my own shitty little apartment. So I set up my account and marketed myself as a writer who would do various writing-related gigs like editing, proofreading, and...ghostwriting. 
Now, it was the ghostwriting gig that got the most hits. There were people who wanted me to help them make their memoir dreams a reality, or write steamy romance novels, or even write...Minecraft fanfiction.......
??:
Hey. Do you have any knowledge on the game Minecraft? I would like you to provide me with a sample of 2 diary entries (100-200 words) on the character "ender man".
ZB:
Yes, I'm very familiar with the game. When would you like this by?
??:
If you can deliver two diary entries in 1-3 days I am willing to pay you $30. Must be creative and knowledgeable of the game. I will be using copyscape to check for plagiarism.
Txt:
[2 diary entries later]
??:
Hey, I like your writing style. So for this enderman character I described him as a legendary enderman. Do you think you can work around that? 
??:
5000 words. 1-3 days. $30. Long term if I like the work you provide. ConsisMay turn this into a sequel.
ZB:
Great! I'm looking forward to working with you! Are these stories going to be published?
??:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I'm not sure if it is going to be published or what my employer wants to do with this. I'm working under someone else as well and I was not given much information. 
Txt:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[one 5000-word book later]
??:
Great story! Would you like to continue to write a sequel for this character? A second story?
ZB:
Sure, I'd love to!
??:
But rather than just writing the minimum 5000 words, I would like you to go above and beyond. Exceed my expectations :)
Txt:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[another "above and beyond" 5000-word book later]
??:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
DO you think you could come up with a new plot after the 4th diary when carl and steve finally defeats the ender man?
ZB:
Do you mean the Ender Dragon? They defeated the Ender Dragon in the first book.
??:
Oh, wait so what was the conclusion for the second one? wait, can you give me a brief description of what is goin on with the second one? I didnt get a chance to read it. I just send it to my partner
ZB:
[make a face]
Txt:
[one summary later]
??:
Great. Thank you. Please begin the next diary and the plot is free for you to decide :)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

So... I wrote Minecraft books: "The Diary of a Legendary Enderman" books 1-3. And I sent them to my fiverr customer. And then they sent them to some mysterious upper manager. And then they were published on Amazon for $10 each. And I was paid next to nothing.
This was actually something I'd been planning to talk about in a much bigger video in May - and that video is still going to happen, and it's going to be one of the biggest videos I've done, in terms of scope - like I'm talking to a lawyer to make sure it's all even legal, and...there's just a lot. So keep an eye out for it, and if you're watching from the future...it should be linked down below, and it adds a whole other layer of context and complexity and confusion to the already-complicated topic of the ethics of ghostwriting and how writers-for-hire are treated.
Anyway, I know what you're thinking: "How can all this be legal?" Right? Like, those other books were definitely infringing on copyright, so these - books that literally have "Enderman" in the title and "Minecraft" on the cover - are definitely illegal, too, right? Well, dear listener, I thought the same thing.
But, it turns out that it's totally okay. Mojang is really chill about fan works, so as long as you don't have "Minecraft" as the first word in the title, and as long as you make it clear that your thing is "unofficial," then it's 100% fine. You can make it and sell it to your heart's content. So, those books I wrote were actually legal.
But that doesn't make them okay. Now, it's not the books themselves that I have a problem with - it's the stuff behind the books: the driving force that's making these kinds of churned-out kids' books a viable market. That's what I have a problem with.
And that's why watching RetroGamingNow's video was really wild, because I didn't realize just how deep this rabbit hole went. I thought my ghostwriting experience was an isolated incident. I didn't realize that there was a whole, huge market for these low-quality, low-effort Minecraft books for kids. But there is. And it's a problem.
The Problem
Part 1
So what really is the problem with all of this? Like, why am I making a whole video about some weird kids' books? They're kids' books. They don't matter. Right? Well, I'd like to bring in another video to help illuminate another angle of this whole rabbithole: "Weird Kids' Videos and Gaming the Algorithm" by Folding Ideas.
In the video, Dan Olson talks about the phenomenon of surreal cartoon and live-action videos of popular movie characters (like Elsa from Frozen and Spiderman) doing weird, sometimes bordering on inappropriate, sometimes definitely inappropriate skits. This was big in the mid-2010s, and since then YouTube has really cracked down on this kind of content, but it's still an important part of the platform's history.
Hundreds of channels, many of which were actually connected and run by the same parent group - churned out these videos featuring these huge, easily recognizable properties doing weird and often incomprehensible stuff, and kids would watch these videos on repeat for literally millions of hours altogether. Some of these videos had tens of millions of views, because their titles were just word-salad made to appeal to The Algorithm, so one would lead to the next, would lead to the next, would lead to the next, and kids were just sucked down the rabbit-hole of garbage content.
The popularity of these videos kind of sputtered out by 2018/2019 thanks to YouTube's new guidelines for children's content, but this phenomenon is still alive and well in the Minecraft books we've been talking about. Just like superheroes and Disney princesses, Minecraft is a wildly popular franchise - it reached over 200 million total sales by 2020, and Minecraft videos on YouTube have totaled over 200 billion views - that's billion with a b.
For both the videos and the books, people have identified these really popular pieces of media and found a way to recreate them in a variety of forms (some of which are more legal than others...), and make a profit. So we know that they're choosing these properties because they're popular (especially with kids, who are an easy market), but now the question becomes, why does it suck so much? Well, because it can suck and still make money.
In his video, Dan says he doesn't know whether the weird kids' videos were made by people or by some video-generating AI...and that he doesn't really care. The standards for the quality of the videos are so low that a machine can make a video that's just as watchable as any of the ones actual humans made. Basically, the videos are so low-effort that there's functionally no difference in quality between the stuff made by people and the stuff made by algorithms:
"These children's videos form a sort of inverse Turing test as whether they are made by individuals who just don't care beyond min-maxing their search engine optimization, or are made by programs smashing elements together from a word cloud, it is almost impossible to tell the difference."
And what's interesting is that this was a point that RGN brought up in his video about the bootleg books, too. He said he sort of assumed the books were generated by a program that just pulled transcripts from videos and put them into an e-book format, but that there were some things that clearly had to have had some kind of human touch to them, like how any reference to the original creator was wiped from the script. So this line between human-made content and machine-made content is so blurred that we really can't tell if there's even any human brain behind these sketchy products.
And even in the case of the books I wrote, there was still not very much effort going into it. I mean, I tried my best to write good stuff, but from the perspective of the people selling these books, it was next to no effort at all. They just had to outsource the actual writing of the books to some college kid somewhere for 30 bucks, and then just put that Word document in an ebook format, slap a cover on it, and then it was ready to sell.
All of these types of kids' content were incredibly low-effort, but selling low-effort stuff isn't illegal. And it's honestly not even immoral. So what's the problem with doing something the easy way? If it's actually this easy to make money, it'd be foolish not to take advantage of it, right? 
Well, in a vacuum - all things being equal - sure. If you want to sell garbage to people, and if people buy it, go ahead. But I think what makes the difference in this case is who the audience is. This Minecraft content - like the "frozen elsa pregnant colors superhero spider-man Hulk vs venom Joker fidget spinners colors for kids" videos - is geared purposefully and specifically toward children.
To the people making this content, kids are easy prey. They don't know any better. They see something that says "Minecraft" and they click. They see the books that look just like their YouTube videos, they see the books that look just like that other series they like, and they want it. Who wouldn't want a crossover between two of your favorite franchises, right?
And one response to this might be that, yeah, kids aren't very smart. They haven't had the life experience to teach them not to fall victim to scams, so people shouldn't be blamed for taking advantage of that. It's a valid market.
Part 2
But I think we need to take a step back and think about why kids do this in the first place. What is it about this content that's so appealing to them? Why do they watch those kinds of videos over and over and over. Why do they like seeing familiar characters everywhere?
The reason kids are so into this kind of content is the same reason kids like to watch the same movie over and over and over. Or read the same book at bedtime night after night after night. They like repetition. Kids enjoy repetition because repetition helps them learn, so their brains are hardwired to want repetition.
Kids also enjoy repetition because it's comfortable. If they have a consistent cast of characters and they know what sorts of roles they'll be playing, then they know what's coming, and that's comforting. When so much of their world is scary and unpredictable, having books or cartoons or YouTube videos that they know will be the same as they've always been... It feels...safe.
So I don't want to put any blame on the children who read or watch the kinds of things I've talked about today. Kids will be kids and what kids want is to consume the same piece of media over and over and over and over and over until it slowly breaks down every bit of patience that their parents have left.
And, on the one hand, it'd be really easy to put the blame on the individuals creating and selling these products. I mean, some of them are just obviously violating copyright, but even the other creators are doing some problematic things. They're exploiting children (who they think they can get away with selling garbage to), and exploiting people like me who were willing to work for way under market price for what I was doing. 
And what's worse is that they were doing all this exploitation to mass-produce really low-quality stuff. RGN's Minecraft bootlegs and Dan Olson's Spiderman and Pregnant Elsa videos and my Diary of a Legendary Enderman books were all...pretty bad. They weren't the kind of thing people would really want their kids to be reading or watching. They had no real substance or meaning or purpose.
If there was any quality in any of these products, that quality came from the people actually doing the work. The quality came from the proofreaders and the printers and the video editors and the writers. The people who were paid pennies to make these products actually readable or watchable. The quality did not come from the channels themselves or publishers or any of the higher-ups who were actually reaping the rewards from selling these garbage products.
And if kids got any enjoyment from these things then that was incidental, too. Any enjoyment they got came from the original source material, from seeing the YouTubers or Marvel characters or Minecraft mobs. All the things that were actually created with thought and care and passion.
Part 3
But, even still... I don't really want to put all the blame on the writers or creators of these books and videos, either. All the actual illegal stuff aside, in this world, with this economy, in this society that we live in, it just makes sense to make money in the easiest way possible, right? When we're incentivized to make the most money with the least amount of effort, why would we not do that?
Is it really fair to blame people for taking advantage of a system that incentivizes this kind of thing? And, to be clear, it is a problem with the system. This is just one very small corner of the system, but this one part - the way the market incentivizes the mass production of garbage - is representative of the rest of the system, too. The way this bootleg Minecraft content market works is how every market works.
For instance, when I was working on this script and talking to Charlie the Editor about it, he told me about how he - as a full adult human - had something similar happen to him recently, where he went to buy a copy of the "screenplay" of his partner's favorite movie, but then, when he got it, it turned out to just be a transcript of the movie printed in a cheap booklet. These kinds of cheap cash-grabs aren't just happening to kids' content. They're happening to all content. Because if they're willing to exploit children, they're willing to exploit anyone.
This doesn't just affect little kids who don't know any better. It affects you and the media you enjoy. And the solution to this isn't just to have more copyright law. I'm not saying Mojang needs to change its policy for fan creations and take down every book that uses the word "Minecraft" in it. I honestly think more companies should do what Mojang is doing. What I am saying is that if a system makes the production of garbage a valuable venture, it isn't a very good system...and either needs to evolve, or just stop/change.
"Exploitation is encoded into the systems we are building, making it harder to see, harder to think and explain, harder to counter and defend against. Not in a future of AI overlords and robots in the factories, but right here, now, on your screen, in your living room and in your pocket. ... These videos, wherever they are made, however they come to be made, and whatever their conscious intention (i.e. to accumulate ad revenue) are feeding upon a system which was consciously intended to show videos to children for profit. ... What we're talking about is very young children, effectively from birth, being deliberately targeted with content...via networks which are extremely vulnerable to exactly this form of abuse. It's not about trolls, but about a kind of violence inherent in the combination of digital systems and capitalist incentives. It's down to that level of the metal." (quote from the Medium article linked below)
We need to change things. But until that change happens, you probably shouldn't buy the books or watch the videos that these people make. But also remember that behind every Diary of a Legendary Enderman, there's a struggling college student just trying to make ends meet by doing the only thing they've ever really been good at. Writing...weird video game fanfiction.
The Solution
I guess the conclusion of this whole thing is that we need to do more to protect kids. Which feels like a cop-out answer. Y'know? Like this whole video really just comes down to "Won't someone think of the children???"?
But I don't think there's anything we can do right now, other than just not buying these books and then reporting the ones that are actually illegal.  If you have a solution to this, then please leave it in the comments, because I genuinely don't know where to go from here. Outside of huge, systemic change that removes the incentives people have for making this low-effort kids' content, I think we might just be stuck wading through this bog of bootleg garbage.
But that's kind of a downer, so let me leave you on a positive note. Creation - genuine creativity, in all its forms - is hard. When you put your heart into your work and aim to make the best things you can make, it's going to be hard. But, I promise you, it is always worth it. 
When I write poems, when I make videos, when I work on my novel, it is sometimes lonely, and often challenging, but it is always fulfilling. When you know that what you're doing is your best - when you know you worked hard to make a thing and you put a piece of yourself into that thing, even if you are the only person in the world who ever sees that thing - you've created something. You've put something into the world that wasn't there before, and that means something. That is significant.
So, keep crafting. Keep writing and building and drawing and painting and making music and games and puzzles and art and all the little things that make life beautiful. If we keep putting stuff like that into the world, maybe we can make things a little brighter. It's worth a shot, right?

End Crawl and Poem
Thanks so much for sticking around to the end of the video! If you're watching from the future, be sure to check out the follow-up video that's linked in the description and on the end-screen. I want to give a massive thank-you to Mildred from ThoughtSlime who did a frighteningly good job at playing the "weird customer on fiverr" role [add bit about Dan Olson here]
I want to give a huge thanks to my patrons and members, whose names you can see scrolling here. And if you would like to join them in the credits, then hop on over to my Patreon, linked in the description, or hit that "join" button next to the "subscribe" button, and you can get lots of cool things like behind-the-scenes stuff and little extra videos - for this month, the extra is actually going to be me doing a dramatic reading of one of the Minecraft books I wrote, so if that sounds fun, then go ahead and become a supporter!
I also want to give an extra special thanks to A Tasty Snack, Adam, Al Sweigart, Dylan, Robert Bradford, and Science Punk Sellout who make it possible for me to feed my cats.
And finally, we have our Patron Poem of the video. For Jessica Goodall, here is Hard Drive Space.

Hard Drive Space 

like your childhood notebooks
full of the names of 8-year-old boys
and missized butterflies and tigers
pages now mothball lost in attic dust

or those out-grown blue shoes
full of field trips and first kisses
and hard marching band miles
off in some box in some closet

a whole world of ones and zeroes
empty but for castles and hoarded riches
and memories of middle-school late nights
is burned away to make space




And until next time, stay safe, stay warm, and I'll see y'all again soon, I hope. Bye, folks :)





This video is about nothing.

Welcome to the void. It is an uncomfortable place for many people. 
If the discomfort of an endless sea of emptiness fills your mind with terror...or with the quiet loneliness that eats away at the edges of your consciousness in the middle of the night...
Then click away. This video will be here when you are ready.
But if you dare to brave the vast Nothing  -  the great vacuum  -  the Big Empty... Welcome. Let's go.


What is nothing?
When I say "nothing," what image appears in your mind's eye? What flavor dances across your tongue? What sensation creeps up your spine, or sparks between your organs?
Emptiness? Darkness? Loneliness? ...Peacefulness?

For many of us, the idea of "nothing" conjures the image of empty space. Whether it's the air in front of our faces or the vacuum of the cosmos, "nothing" is the empty space between things.
But is that really "nothing"? Is the space between things really "empty"?
The space between me and my camera may look empty, but in reality, it's filled to the brim with chemicals  -  with atoms of all sizes and names  -  with energy in the form of heat, as the breath from my mouth expels forth and pushes itself into the cocktail of gases already present.
The space between planets is filled with light, with energy, with the push and pull of gravity.
The space between atoms  -  and between the parts of atoms and between the infinitely small parts of those parts  -  is filled with electric fields and magnetism constantly fighting to keep the fabric of matter together and apart, in a never-ending battle of forces.

Ancient Buddhists are thought to be the first to have a word for "nothing" - śūnya (shoon-ya).
The Buddhists saw nothing as an important spiritual ideal. It's the state of non-self; it's the ability to see the world as it is, without disturbance or distraction.
The ancient Mesopotamians are credited with being the first to invent zero, though the Mayans weren't far behind, inventing it a full thousand years before the idea came to Europe.
Both the Buddhist sunya and the concept of zero indicate a lack of something. A lack of worry, a lack of self, a lack of a number.

But if "nothing" is just "a lack of something," then does that mean for nothing to exist, something must also exist? 
Imagine, for a moment, that the Big Bang never happened. Not only was there no catalyst, but that infinitesimally small mote that contained all matter in the universe just didn't exist. Never existed.
In this empty universe, there would be no "somethings" to lack. There would just be...nothing. There would be nothing without something ever having existed.
Therefore, "nothing" cannot be defined as the "lack of something." To have a "lack of something" there has to first be "something" to lack.

But maybe this works in theory. In that empty universe filled with nothingness, where thing-ness never actually existed, one could still theorize about theoretical thing-ness existing there.
In that universe, "nothing" could exist if there were some thing  -  even just in theory  - to compare it to.
Nothingness, then, seems to only exist if you have somethingness beside it. Negative space requires the presence of positive space  -  The Void only exists in the area between objects.
But now we're back to the spaces between. Back to liminal spaces.

The word "liminal" comes from the Latin word "limen" which means "threshold," and in psychology, it describes the line between what we can perceive and what escapes our notice  -  what is "sub-liminal".
But just because we cannot perceive something doesn't mean that thing doesn't exist. If a tree falls in the forest, and all that...
Our liminal perceptions  -  those things we see and feel that we can only see and feel in fleeting moments, at the edge of sleep or out of the corner of our eye  -  they are real. 
Real enough to elicit a response, real enough to send electrical impulses through the folds of our brains.
That's not nothing.

But if all it takes to make something a thing is to have it affect our minds, then does our thinking about nothing make it...something?
When I asked you to visualize "nothing"  -  to close your eyes and sense how it made you feel  -  did "nothing"  -  through some kind of internet-mediated alchemy  -  get transformed into a thought? 
Transformed from an abstract, eternal conundrum  -  a question vexing experts and philosophers and children  -  into electrical currents in your synapses, in your nerves...by my voice, alone?
If our minds can turn "nothing" into "a thing"  -  what does that mean for us? For the capabilities of our brains?
Does the concept of nothingness grant us the power of creation?

These are questions that don't have answers. Not yet, at least. Our knowledge of the existence of nothingness has shined a light on the void, and the void...has consumed that light, and offered no answers.
For many people, nothing is...terrifying. It represents everything that could be...but is not. 
It is the Forever that came Before, and the even greater Forever that will come After.
No light, no air, no Earth, no warmth, no sound, no thought...no life...no love.
Nothing.

But nothing isn't evil. And it shouldn't be frightening. In fact, to me...nothing  -  that indefinable, infinite void that exists somewhere out there  -  is...comforting.
The Void represents the spaces between parts of reality. It's a place where the universe, the world, society  -  and me  -  don't exist.
It's dark and unknown and endless and...yes, that can be overwhelming.
But it's also...soft. And warm. It's like a blanket made of thick, black velvet, that smells like lilac and old books. 
When it wraps around you, it squeezes like a hug from your favorite grandparent, and lingers just long enough for you to know you are loved.
It's deep and tangled and alluring, like a cave in the woods or an abandoned factory. Curiosity pushes you in and everything is dark and still and the air smells like wet wood. 
And your eyes are on everything that you're too afraid to touch because it could break the spell of A Place That Should Not Be  -  
And maybe you'll find treasure or bones or nothing at all...or a story you could keep to yourself, locked away in the part of your memory reserved for solitude.
You know you could go in deeper, see more, find more dust  -  and maybe you will, when you come back... if...you come back...
The Void is constant  -  it's always there  -  it's the lining of the fabric of reality, and if you just pull back the curtain, you can see it...
Under everything. Between everything. Always there.
And it's...comforting. It's comforting to know that emptiness and solitude and warm, quiet darkness are always there, away from the loud, bright, busy world that exhausts me down to my bones.

"Nothing" is the space between things. And that is where I want to be. 
I want to exist in the liminal spaces, in the corners of eyes, in the fleeting sounds you think you hear from across the house.
I want my words and my actions to be real and be felt by real people, but when they look for the source... They don't see me.
I want to be invisible and unknown, but I also want to be...comforting and warm. 
I want my words to be soft like a blanket. I want to smell like lilac and old books. I want to write poems that feel like hugs.
I want to be deep and tangled and alluring. I want you to be curious enough to find me, but I want to be precious enough to be untouchable.
I want my stories to become your stories.
And above all, I want to be constant. I want to always be there. 
Maybe not me, but the ghost of me. The shell of me. The golem made of all my creations.

Because maybe nothing  -  The Void  -  isn't just emptiness. Maybe it's...where we go when we fall asleep.
Maybe it's where all our forgotten keys and socks lost in the wash end up.
Maybe it's where our minds go during highway hypnosis, when we drive the same drive we've driven for years, and we somehow make that drive without any memory of doing it...

"Nothingness" is endless. It stretches on forever and ever, on and on, until the end of time... and then on past that, too.
But it's not a hole at the bottom of reality, or a vacuum in space waiting to swallow all of existence. 
"Nothing"  -  dear Intergalactic Trans Celebrity Juliet Mylan  -  is something else entirely.

"Nothing"
It's a room with dark wood walls, and a floor covered in well-worn rugs.
In the corner, a dimly lit Christmas tree pours red and green over someone's workboots.
You notice the air has a musty wetness, like lots of old rooms in old houses.
Like your grandparents' house.
Yes, it smells distinctly like your grandparents' house.
Like cool Oregon air and acres of grassland baking in the summer sun and...and cows.

The couch  -  you must have missed it before  -  sits in the middle of the room.
The graying leather fades along creases, and years-stained whiteness pools on the left cushion.
That was your spot, when you and your brother played...
Oh, you forget the name, now...
How long has it been since you've seen him?

You forget...
How did you get here?
You don't remember coming into this house. You don't know if this room is even in a house.
How did you get here? 
The cold open air of the outside feels a thousand miles away. You hear a coyote howl somewhere in the distance.
How did you get here? 
The television in the corner blinks on. An old CRT. It's just static.
How did you get here?

It doesn't matter.
The door is unlocked, there, behind you.
It's ajar, but you can't quite see through to the other side.
You can leave whenever you want.
Do you?



This episode was made possible by all of my wonderful Patrons, whose names you should see scrolling here. I want to give a special thank you to Sauber, Sigve, A Tasty Snack, Comrade Fox, Robert Bradford, Jameson Huddle, Mohammed Al-Sabah, and Dylan.
If you would like to have early access to videos, have poems written for you, join our Discord server, or just want to support the channel, consider joining us on Patreon, which I have linked in the description.
If you want to support me in other ways, you can like, comment, subscribe, and share this video with anyone you think needs some existential dread in their life.
Anyway, until next time...
Stay safe, stay warm, and I'll see y'all again soon, I hope.
Bye, folks 😊
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Would Pokemon Professors be Good Actual Professors? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Intro 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hello everyone. Today I'm going to be answering a question that has been plaguing us since the beginning of time. A question of such vast importance that only I - the very best YouTuber - am fit to answer it: "Would the Pokemon Professors actually be good, like, real-life professors?" 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So the way this is going to work is I'm going to look at all the main professors from the mainline games (including Legends: Arceus), and I'll be judging them based on a few elements: 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Experience (have they taught before?) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. How they treat the player (stand-in for students) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Their setup (what is their "classroom" like? where do they do their teaching, and is it conducive to education? do they have books? seating? [foreshadowing]) 4. Their personality/vibes (what kind of professor would they be?) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But this isn't a super firm list, and every decision is my personal opinion, so... I know how Pokemon fans get. Let's stay civil. I'm not judging the games, I'm not judging the actual Pocket Monsters, I am judging the educational abilities of our favorite tree-based characters. I've played a lot of Pokemon in my day - Pokemon is very important to me - and so this video is made with nothing but love for the franchise. Alright, let's go. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oak 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So we're starting off with good ol' Professor Oak. The Kanto professor has been around since the very beginning, so there's a lot of evidence to work from as far as judging him. Professor Oak does have some teaching experience, which we learn about when Professor Elm says that he was taught by Oak at "the university," which is probably referring to "Celadon University." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He has some experience, but in practice he doesn't seem to treat the player - as a stand-in for his students - very well. In the anime, he's scatterbrained and dismissive - like when Ash says he saw what turned out to be Ho-Oh, Oak just totally brushes him off. If one of my students came to me with a wild, groundbreaking idea, I'd probably give them the benefit of the doubt and at least hear them out. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the games, his track record is a little better. He's a little tough on the player character, but when you talk to him about your Pokedex as you work on filling it out, he gives good, actionable advice. This is something every good writing professor knows: When you give critique, make
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
sure it's actionable - make sure you tell the student what, specifically, they can do to improve. Oak does exactly that. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But, on the other hand, he does also forget the name of his grandson, so I think we can deduct some points for that. (...we're not doing a points system.) As far as his set-up goes, we know he taught at Celadon University, but there aren't any good interior shots of the university, so I think we can assume it has the usual university classroom set-up, which isn't bad. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But now that he's no longer at the university, he probably does most of his teaching out of his lab, which...could use some work. In the anime, he has one couch, one bookshelf, and a whiteboard. I like small class sizes and informal seating, but this is a bit much. And his lab in the games is even worse. There's a lot of bookshelves, which is great, but there are no chairs. I assume all these desks are standing desks, because there aren't even desk chairs! No chairs! 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, a vibe-check. Professor Oak is kind and has a soft demeanor. Even though he's a very famous and accomplished researcher, he doesn't have a huge ego. And he writes Pokemon poetry. How can I - a published poet - not give him points for that. He's the kind of professor that's probably been around too long and is way past their heyday, but he has tenure and most of the students like him even though he probably only teaches like 2 classes a semester, so the university keeps him around. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
All told, I rank Professor Oak at B-tier, because while he is a good educator and is knowledgeable about his field of study, he could be a little more respectful to his students and...actually give them a place to sit when he teaches them. Buy some chairs, man. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Elm 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Next up is our professor from the Johto region, Professor Elm. As far as experience, we don't know a ton. Most of what we know about Elm is about his research, not his teaching. This doesn't necessarily mean he doesn't have any teaching experience, but it certainly doesn't inspire confidence. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Elm is a bit of a know-it-all, and this affects how he treats the player. He always brings up his research, and wants the player to be involved, and because he's so focused on research-related things, he often interrupts conversations to read emails or take phone calls. He's nice enough, even if he is a little timid. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bulbapedia says that "While he is incredibly knowledgeable, he is known to get into heated arguments with others over research and theories. He also tends to go into unnecessarily lengthy explanations whenever he is asked a question." - these aren't exactly great attributes for a teacher to have. And, on top of that, his official art shows him fumbling with books, with papers falling out of his coat pocket. Those could be your papers that he still hasn't graded.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you've ever had a professor who regularly lost your tests or forgot to grade things, you know how annoying that can be. It's never clear whether Elm taught at Celadon University - we know he was a student there, and actually studied under Prof. Oak, but we don't know much else. So 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
the only setup we can judge is his lab. And...it's bad. It's worse than Oak's. Because Elm's lab is just a tiiiiny bit bigger, and yet he still doesn't have room for chairs. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And finally - the vibe check. Bulbapedia says that "Professor Elm is regarded as sweet and kind hearted by many, including New Bark Town's Nurse Joy." And honestly, if Nurse Joy - light of my life - likes him, then he must not be that bad of a guy, right? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, overall, Professor Elm seems a little bit irritating and pompous, and while he also seems nice, I'm going to have to put him in C tier for actual educational value. He's that professor who cares more about their research than their students, and that doesn't make for a very good teacher. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Birch 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up next is Professor Birch, the 3rd generation Hoenn professor, and my unproblematic dad-bod fave. I love Professor Birch so very much, but I will try to be as objective as possible with my assessment. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bulbapedia says that Birch "doesn't like teaching," but it does say that he's a "very good mentor" to students, so what that says to me is that he works best in non-traditional classroom settings. And that jives with his "classroom" setup, too. Because in both the anime and the game, most of his "teaching" happens in the field. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He does have a lab, and the lab....has a single chair. So that's a step up from the earlier two professors. But because he doesn't have a classroom in the traditional sense, his teaching style leans into the concept of "learning by doing," which I think is a great pedagogical philosophy, but also...it doesn't necessarily work for all kinds of students. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Birch is also high-energy, and he talks to the player with a lot of pep and enthusiasm, which - again, is something some students would like, and some students wouldn't. He's also written several books about Pokemon habitats, so pairing that enthusiasm with actual content knowledge is usually a good combination. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
All that said...he's also very cute and charismatic. And maybe that says more about my taste in men than anything else, but I know that if I had Prof. Birch, I'd be sure to come to class and pay attention. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, ultimately, I put him in A-tier. He's not the best teacher, but he's pretty damn good. He has some solid pedagogy backing up his methods, but like I said earlier, these methods don't work for every student's learning style.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rowan 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Then we have the Gen 4 Professor, Professor Rowan. He's a grumpy old man, but even grumpy old men can be good teachers. Rowan is the first professor who has teaching experience that is still ongoing. In the anime, he runs the "Pokemon Summer Academy," which is an educational summer camp in the Sinnoh region. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And this is great. It's hard to tackle something with as many moving parts as a summer camp for tweens. It's even described as an "experience-based education" - which, as you all know, I'm a huge fan of. But Bulbapedia says "He was strict when it came to punishing his students for misbehavior, but happily gave them credit for completing their tasks to a high standard." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The strict punishments aren't great praxis, but having high standards isn't necessarily a bad thing. Basically, he just seems very old-school. It's not bad, it just might be a little outdated. And this outdated pedagogy is reflected in how he interacts with the player. As Bulbapedia states, "He has a stern personality that makes him seem intimidating and mean, but he is actually very kind and patient." 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So that's good! As far as Rowan's classroom setup, he has the best resources so far. The Pokemon Summer Academy is a really great location, and looks like an incredible place to do learning. I don't love the traditional rows of desks in the classroom, but compared to the setups of the other Professors, it's incredible. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So Rowan has good experience, a great set-up, and a harsh - if well-grounded - approach to education. He's a grumpy old man, but he's a grumpy old man who is very intelligent and passionate about education. I might not love his methods, but I have to admit: He's an A-tier educator. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Juniper 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Up next is our Unova Professor, Professor Juniper. She is the first main-series professor to be a woman, and she's....great! So, for full transparency, I haven't played the Gen 5 games, Black and White are really the only ones I haven't played at all, so I have no personal experience with Professor Juniper. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But everything I found about her on Bulbapedia and in the anime...was great. I couldn't find anything bad or critical. Even her lab is great! She has chairs! Multiple chairs! The only thing that is a low-point is that she doesn't have any obvious teaching experience.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
But! In the games and in the anime, she seems very attentive to the player or to Ash. She listens well, and when she responds, her responses are clear and kind and patient. She seems like the kind of teacher who really gives a part of themselves to their students - the kind of teacher who, when you talk to her, you feel like she really cares about what you're saying. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
While I was researching her, I found something that...could be a positive or a negative. And that's that Ken Sugimori, the art director for Pokemon, thought she was a New Yorker type, "a real career woman." Professor Juniper is a girlboss. But like...an unproblematic girlboss. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the anime, it's shown that she's very busy, but that even though she has all this other stuff on her plate, she has her shit together and really takes care of Ash. She's kind and knowledgeable and gets stuff done. She's the kind of professor who gets 100 student papers and gets them back to you by the end of the week. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
She's S-tier. She's the kind of teacher I wish I could be. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sycamore 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Next is Sycamore, our gen 6 Professor from Kalos. Pokemon X was the first Pokemon game I purchased as a full adult human person, so this generation holds a special place in my heart. But while I think fondly of the Kalos region, I don't have many actual memories of Professor Sycamore? 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He wasn't very memorable, but as I did some digging to put this video together, I realized that's because, as an instructor, he was very hands-off. Where Professor Juniper was very involved and attentive, Professor Sycamore was much more laid back. And this is seen in how he treats his past students, as well. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sycamore does have evidence of teaching experience, since there's an arc in the anime where a past student comes back and is...edgy and...traumatized, and it's a whole thing. But when he sees his student, and he sees that his student is having some emotional turmoil, Sycamore doesn't push him, he's not overbearing - he gives him space and time to work through the stuff he needs to work through. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This can be a great educational method! It's not one I use as a teacher and it's not one I liked as a student, but I know there are lots of students who prefer self-guided learning where the teacher is totally hands-off. So there is sound pedagogy behind what he does! 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And his lab is...not bad. It has chairs! So that's something! But it is in a tower in Lumiose City, and I find cities loud and distracting, so that's not for me. But I know there are some people who wouldn't mind that kind of setting.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Now, as far as vibes...he's young, he's charming, he's chill, he's attractive, and he knows it. He flirts with some of the female characters in the anime, and he cares quite a bit about his appearance. But this isn't inherently a bad thing. Because, let's be honest, when you have an attractive teacher, you pay more attention in class. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
It's hard to decide where Sycamore belongs on the tier, because if I were judging him from a student's perspective, I'd put him in C-tier, or maybe B-tier, because his teaching style is just not what I prefer as a student. But as an instructor, I recognize that his teaching style is based in good pedagogical practices, it's just that that pedagogy might not be perfect for every student. But this video is about a professor judging other professors, so as a professor I put him in A-tier. But like...A-minus. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kukui 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Next up is Professor Kukui, the professor from Alola. And his entry is going to be a little shorter, as are the entries for the rest of the professors because these games haven't been out all that long, so there's just less to work with. But, that being said, Kukui is an interesting character. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He and his wife run a school in Alola - and his wife is also a professor, and, honestly, a better professor, but I'm focusing on the mainline professors, so... Apologies Professor Burnet. You're amazing. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Anyway, Kukui does have teaching experience at a school that has good facilities, and he also treats the player well - he's very nice, very funny, and energetic, and honestly his depiction in the anime is... I enjoy it. But... Professor Kukui has, what I call, "history teacher football coach" energy. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
He is very charismatic and it sounds like his classes would be super fun, but they wouldn't necessarily be intellectually rigorous. And this isn't because Kukui himself isn't intellectual - he is a professor, that's impressive. But he isn't a full time professor, because he is also a professional wrestler. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And that's really cool. He's the coolest of the pokemon professors. He's definitely the best person of all the Pokemon Professors, but I think he'd struggle to focus on his students when he also has to worry about the wrestling matches he has coming up. For this reason, he's C-tier - which breaks my heart; I really do love Kukui, and I'd love to just hang out with him. But he's the professor whose class you take to get an easy A.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Magnolia 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Next is Professor Magnolia. And her entry is pretty hard because she's the professor for Pokemon Sword and Shield, but, honestly, she is barely in those games. She's never there. She doesn't really do anything. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We don't know a ton about her - we don't know her teaching experience, we don't know a lot about who she was as a professor back when she actually did professor-y things. We can make some guesses, like... She's old, so she's like those professors who have tenure so they can do whatever they want, so their classes are fun and weird and laid back. But those are all guesses. But you know what we do know? We know what her lab looks like. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And her lab. Is. Incredible. Her Pokemon Lab is cozy. It has a library. It has a greenhouse or sunroom or...whatever that glass area is. Either way, it's great. It's warm and sunny and beautiful and I love it so very, very much. I want to teach in this space. That's all I want in my life. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
She's that tenured professor who doesn't do a lot of teaching anymore, but she does kind of hang out around the department and make snarky comments about the administration because she doesn't give a shit and she can't get fired. So she's B-tier simply for her incredible lab-classroom and her wealth of experience and advice that she can offer other instructors. We don't know whether she'd actually be a good professor, so we just don't have enough information to rank her higher. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sonia 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And then we have Sonia, who is actually the granddaughter of Prof. Magnolia, and at the end of the games she takes over from her grandmother to be the new Professor for the region. And what's great is that the player spends a ton of time with Sonia throughout the game, so we know a lot more about her than we did about her grandmother. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We know that she hasn't done a lot of formal teaching - she mentors the player, but she hasn't really been in the classroom. We know she's written a book - or in the process of writing a book that she then gets published by the end of the game - so she clearly knows her subject area. And we know that she's a young woman who's trying to figure out what to do with her life. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
She's snarky and smart and doesn't take shit from other characters. And what's even better is that because she's taking her grandmother's position, she also gets to take her grandmother's lab. And the lab was kind of my favorite thing about Prof. Magnolia. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Now, I might be biased because I was also a young teacher who didn't know what she wanted to do with her life, but Sonia is definitely S-tier. She doesn't have teaching experience, but all professors start somewhere. You have to start with no experience. That's how it works. But she
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
probably will be a good teacher in the future, because she's a good mentor and she also chooses to be a professor - she wants this, she wants to be a good teacher. She just needs to be given the chance. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Laventon 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And finally, we have Professor Laventon. He's the professor in Pokemon: Legends Arceus, and we know...basically nothing about him. We know he's the only one in the region that knows anything about Pokemon. And that's pretty much it. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So we're mostly going to be ranking him based on his vibe check. And, uh...his vibes aren't great. Throughout the game he refers to the player character as "my child," which is super creepy. Like, when you meet a literal child who falls out of a space-time rift in the sky, you don't immediately call them "my child." Stop it. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Otherwise, he seems nice. But niceness can go too far and be too creepy if it's not done carefully. We all know of the weird old guy teachers who are a little too nice to their female students. For me it was my calculus teacher in high school and my poetry teacher in college. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And the worst thing is that this world is really dangerous! There are wild pokemon everywhere, some of which are really powerful, and you can literally die every time you go outside...so this just doesn't seem like a great environment for learning. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So I'm putting him in D-tier. He has no positive attributes except being nice. But his lab is very cozy and it does have chairs, which is more than we can say for a lot of these other Professors. So...maybe Laventon is S-tier. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
So, what have we learned? Well, we know there aren't enough educational institutions in the Pokemon universe. We know that the folks of Kanto and Johto don't know what chairs are. And we know that being a teacher is hard, but there is no single right way to do things. ...and we also know that I love Pokemon very, very much and I will take literally any excuse to talk about it. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And I know this video was a little different from other ones I've done, but I wanted to do something light and fun because I have some really big projects planned for the next few months, some of which are related to trauma and they're all important and exciting, but I wanted to make some lighter stuff to balance it out.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I want to give a huge thanks to my Patrons and members whose names you should see scrolling...somewhere...around here. And I want to give a huge thanks to A Tasty Snack, Adam, Al Sweigart, Dylan, Robert Bradford, and Science Punk Sellout. Thank you all so very much. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
And finally, here's our Patron Poem of the video; for Criminal Pink, here is "The Pilgrimage". The Pilgrimage 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
She crawls across gravel, soft-bellied and wet. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Behind her, a line of prismatic slime 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
that dances iridescent when the light hits just right. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fat feelers mosey over stones and lead her home, 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
back to the cool and the damp and the dew 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
that collects on her skin in the mornings. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
That matriarch of mucus and all that trawls in the mud 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
she paints rainbows on the sidewalk 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
for us to find in the moon-shy evenings of May
PragerU and the Politics of Pain
Intro

The other day, I was browsing YouTube on my phone, and I ran across this community post from PragerU. This post contained a poll with a single sentence: "Most of leftism is an avoidance of pain - agree or disagree"
Now...my gut instinct, because it's PragerU, was to go "no, of course not, obviously." But...the more I sat and thought about it, the more I...wasn't sure I was right. I wanted to genuinely, really engage with this and think about what this statement meant, so... That's what this video is for. 
In this video, I want to figure out 3 things about this post: What does it mean? Is it true? And is it good or bad?
So let's get to it.
What does it mean?
Before we can even answer the question that they've posed, we need to figure out what they mean by "avoidance of pain" - because this is such a weird way to phrase this idea, right? So I did a little bit of digging, and came across this PragerU video about the differences between the left and the right, and how that difference comes down to the left's fear of pain. But listen to how they define pain:
            https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IC7ZU5vGPy0&ab_channel=PragerU
            	https://www.prageru.com/video/how-do-you-deal-with-painful-truths-left-vs-right-4
To PragerU, pain is basically "the acknowledgment of the tough facts of life." Reality sucks, and people are inherently bad, and leftists are just afraid of believing that's the case. And they're "avoiding pain" by being hopeful and optimistic, by believing that the world can get better and that people are good. They are afraid of the "facts of life" that are too "painful" to acknowledge.
But I think that pain is more than that, too. If we look at a lot of their other videos, we can see that pain is also "hard work" and "failure" and "not getting your way." Pain is any amount of discomfort or conflict. And this is something we could apply to any partisan issue.
Like welfare programs - the left wants to give stuff to people who didn't earn it. If those people want money or food or housing, they should work for it. You can't just have things for free - you need to suck it up and work hard. 
Or trans rights - the left doesn't want to acknowledge that there are only two genders and that gender doesn't change, and instead they want to pander to the feelings of trans people and tell them it's okay to feel that way, instead of telling them the hard truth of "basic biology."
Or even COVID responses - the left is generally pro-vaccine, -mask mandates, and -social distancing measures, but people on the right are more in favor of the "well, we're all going to get it eventually, so let's just let it happen and let herd immunity do its thing." method. It's a painful reality that we're all going to have to deal with eventually, so why not just rip the bandaid off all at once.
But this brings us to our next question...
Is it true?
Is all this true? This is what the right thinks the left believes - it's what they think drives the decision making and policies of left-leaning people - but is this actually accurate to reality?
Well, to answer that, I want to take you on a little social psychology tangent:
There's this thing called "regulatory focus theory." And regulatory focus theory posits that people tend to pursue pleasure and avoid pain; that's just naturally what drives our decision making. For instance, you might buy a car that's cool and sporty (pursuing pleasure - or what regulatory focus theory calls a "promotion goal") or you might get one that's safe and reliable (avoiding pain - or what regulatory focus theory calls a "prevention goal").
While we all use this paradigm to make our decisions, different kinds of people tend to prioritize one or the other more often. Studies have shown that "individuals with an independent self-view" tend toward promotion goals, "whereas those with an interdependent self-view" tend toward prevention goals. In other words, people who are focused on themselves as individuals prioritize pursuing pleasure, but people who see themselves as part of a community prioritize avoiding pain.
I once read that the fundamental difference between the right and the left comes down to thinking of things in terms of individuals, vs thinking of things in terms of systems. People on the right usually focus on personal responsibility and individual choices, whereas people on the left focus on systems and structures and hierarchies. For instance, think about conversations about police brutality. Where folks on the left see systemic racism, people on the right see individual bad apples.
If we combine this with regulatory focus theory, then the conclusion is that people who see issues as individual (people on the right) tend toward pursuing pleasure; People who see things as systems (people on the left) tend toward avoiding pain. 
Now, I'm extrapolating from marketing research and working with generalizations and applying the conclusions to a bigger, broader point, but... If we're thinking in terms of generalizations... Then it turns out PragerU is right.
Generally speaking, leftists prioritize avoiding pain.
...sort of. The "pain" they're avoiding isn't necessarily an acknowledgment of life's hard truths. It's...usually literal pain. It's physical, psychological, economic pain. People on the left care about their communities and they want to help the people in their communities to be as pain-free as possible. In that sense....yes, leftists want to avoid pain.
But let's take this back to PragerU's definition of pain. PragerU thinks leftists are afraid of reality. Reality is hard; it's painful; it's full of unfortunate truths that leftists don't want to believe. But is that true?
I don't think so. I think the issue here is that PragerU and their viewers have a fundamentally different view of the world than people on the left have. People on the right see things as immutable; facts are facts, and no new data can change things; the world is one thing, and it's up to us to learn to exist to the best of our ability in that world. Things might suck, but it's a dog-eat-dog world, where only the best survive.
Whereas people on the left see things as...fluid. There is constantly new information to be learned. Things change, and it's up to us to roll with those changes and alter our mindsets accordingly. But this fluidity means we also have the power to change things; if we see something that sucks...we can work to change it. Nothing is static.
If we take these different worldviews into account, we can see where this disconnect happens. It's not that leftists are ignoring harsh realities - it's that they're showing that those things aren't "reality" at all. And, conversely, it's not that people on the right are accepting those harsh realities - it's that they're holding onto inaccurate beliefs because it's easier than confronting the idea that they might be wrong.
So... In that sense... No, "leftism" isn't about avoiding pain.
All told, PragerU is...kind of...right, just not for the reasons they think they are. And they're also wrong, but they're wrong in ways that are...way too big to get into right now. So let's assume that PragerU is right - leftists want to avoid pain by helping people and offering safety nets, etc. - let's take that idea, and ask the final question: Is this good, or is this bad?
Is it a bad thing?
How can avoiding pain be a bad thing? On its surface, avoiding pain sounds like a really logical, natural thing, right? But a lot of our politics - especially economics - are built on the idea that pain isn't just unavoidable, but necessary for a functional society.
In a nutshell, conservative politics often revolve around tightening the national budget, cutting public spending, lowering taxes, deregulation, and generally decreasing the reach and size of government. This is what's called austerity, and it's the basis of Reaganomics. 
We have this idea that for the economy to work, we must go through a tough tightening of our belts; we have to suck it up and deal with not getting everything we want. This is the line of thinking a lot of people use when arguing against welfare programs - we can't just have whatever we want for free.
So a lot of our economic policies are built on the idea that pain is necessary for society to function. And you could also connect it to the Protestant Work Ethic and our obsession with "self-made" success stories and pulling yourself up by your bootstraps. If things are hard, don't complain. It won't get you anywhere. Just suck it up, deal with the pain, and move forward.
Through this lens, pain is not just a good thing, but a necessary thing. Any economy not built on pain is just a fantasy for babies. But this is just capitalist realism talking. We're so ingrained in this system that necessitates an underclass that we can't see any alternative. But to PragerU - a group founded on the principles of capitalism and the "free marketplace of ideas," - pain and competition and ruthlessness are the only viable option.
But there's also another angle of this that I want to look at. Let me read you Hebrews Chapter 12, verses 7-11.
      7 Endure hardship as discipline; God is treating you as his children. For what children are not disciplined by their father? 8 If you are not disciplined -- and everyone undergoes discipline -- then you are not legitimate, not true sons and daughters at all. 9 Moreover, we have all had human fathers who disciplined us and we respected them for it. How much more should we submit to the Father of spirits and live! 10 They disciplined us for a little while as they thought best; but God disciplines us for our good, in order that we may share in his holiness. 11 No discipline seems pleasant at the time, but painful. Later on, however, it produces a harvest of righteousness and peace for those who have been trained by it.
Here, again, pain is framed as a good thing. It means that we're being tested, being disciplined, being trained. You have to go through hardships now in order to get your reward later. No pain, no gain. 
PragerU preaches Judeo-Christian values, so it would be naive to think that they aren't aware of the biblical maxim of "going through pain now so you can reach heaven later." To PragerU, going through pain isn't just vital to a healthy economy, but also to the health of your eternal soul.
And this isn't to say there are no Christian leftists. There are. I know some. This is just to say that, to PragerU, avoiding pain is a bad thing. If something is hurting you, it's up to you to deal with that and move past it. And to leftists...it's not a good thing. Especially when it comes to things like austerity, people on the left are generally...not really a fan of the whole "bootstraps," "survival of the fittest" thing, and instead, if systems are hurting people, it's up to us to change those systems so they stop hurting people in the first place.
And let's not forget that the whole thing comes down to whether people are fundamentally good or bad - Dennis Prager says that "the Left has posited that human nature is good. So...when people do bad things to other people...some outside forces...are responsible, not human nature." If people are good, then it must be systems to blame for bad things, and if systems are to blame, then we can change those systems to prevent them from hurting people. But if people aren't good, then people are to blame, and it's up to individuals to get through the pain, because getting through the pain is the only way to get what you want.
Conclusion
The tough thing about these questions is that there isn't a real, solid answer to any of this. This isn't one of those things like climate change where there's literally decades of research to back it up. This is a question that comes down to values. If you believe God wants us to go through hardships to come out better on the other side, then you see pain as a good thing. If you believe the goal of political action is to come together and work side-by-side to ease each other's pain, for the betterment of all, then pain is something we want to minimize.
So...why does this whole exploratory journey even matter?
Well, the teacher part of me wants to say that any exploration matters because it's good practice to think critically about why you believe things and what the implications of those beliefs are. It's always good to interrogate our beliefs and biases, and I think it's even better to model what that process looks like. But, more concretely, I think that we've learned a little bit more about the ideology of PragerU, and, by extension, the ideology of the sections of the Right that they represent.
Ultimately, we understand what they meant by the statement "most of leftism is an avoidance of pain." And we know why they think that's true, and why the avoidance of pain is - to them - a bad thing. We know that it comes down to whether people are good or bad. If people are good, then we can work together and overcome the painful things. If people are bad, then pain is inevitable, and it's naive to try to avoid it. So you better just suck it up and go through it.
But it's up to us to decide whether we agree with that. And this isn't one of those videos where I'm going to tell you this is right and this other thing is wrong and you have to agree with me. Because I think this question is a lot more personal than that. It's not a policy question, it's not even really a political question; it's a philosophical question that comes down to your values.
So feel free to share in the comments whether you agree with this or not. Personally, I'm a very optimistic person who believes in the goodness of humanity, and I think there are ways to learn and grow that aren't "painful." I'm hopeful - I believe that there is a future that is better, where there is less pain, where things can be good for everyone. I think it's going to be a....journey....to get there, but I believe that unless we strive for better things and have hope that there are better things, things won't get better.
But that's just me. So let me know in the comments what you think, and I'm looking forward to seeing all of the great ideas y'all have. Be safe out there, folks.
Outro and Poem
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! This one was a little different from my usual stuff, but I've been trying some new things recently, just to experiment and see what I like and what you all like, so let me know down in the comments if you want more of these shorter, more exploratory kinds of videos.
Anyway, I want to give a huge thank-you to all my patrons and channel members whose names are scrolling by here, and I want to give a special thanks to A Tasty Snack, Adam, Dylan, JadedFlames, Justin Lowery, Robert Bradford, Science Punk Sellout, and Will Swanson, without whom this video simply would not exist.
And finally, our patron poem of the video. For Kirsten Collins here is "On the shelf at Mo's Hunting and Hardware in Blissville, Kentucky"

On the shelf at Mo's Hunting and Hardware in Blissville, Kentucky

You'd been there for months, 
gathering dust, waiting for the right Carhartt jacket
or trucker-hat-and-work-boots to stop
and pick you up, take you home,
maybe whittle some wood,
or even skin a deer,
if you were lucky.

You envied her,
the Damascus steel blade,
all dark and curves,
who sat in that glass case behind the counter.
It held all the precious things:
bullets and shotgun shells and little tins of snuff
and her.

She had been folded with care 
by rough, tender hands,
folded over on herself
again and again and again,
pounded and hammered and beaten
and plunged into ice-cold water
until she was beautiful.


And, until next time... Stay safe, stay warm, and I'll see y'all again soon, I hope.
Bye, folks :)
Alt-Right Pipeline 2: Electric PragerU
Intro
Do you remember way back in 2017 when everyone was obsessed with the alt-right? In the wake of Gamergate and at the dawn of the Trump presidency, we had identified this new political niche, this radical and sometimes dangerous movement that was gaining a lot of traction and somehow attracting swathes of young (mostly) white men. And we spent years talking about it. Dissecting it. Figuring out who was leading the helm and what kind of rhetorical tactics they were using. We even had a fun little name for it: We called it the Alt-Right Pipeline.

But then...stuff happened. There was a whole pandemic. And an attempted coup. And Australia was on fire for a little bit. (remember that?) And as the world was burning, discussions of the alt-right and the pipeline that had created them...were put aside. We had bigger fish to fry.

Now, don't get me wrong - people are still talking about alt-right figures and radical rhetoric. But it feels different now. We're still talking about it, but we've stopped asking questions about it. We think we have it all figured out - we know there's an alt-right pipeline and we know where it's coming from and we know how they attract people.

...or so we think. Because, as it turns out, while we've been busy with, y'know... The alt-right pipeline has changed.

So let's talk about that. Let's talk about the alt-right and the new alt-right pipeline. And let's talk about the channel that's not just helped the pipeline stay open, but has even added shiny new entrances with sleek, matte branding stamped on the side.

Let's talk...about PragerU.
How has PragerU changed the pipeline?
The Old Pipeline
Alright, so for those of you who may not be familiar, PragerU is a YouTube channel and conservative non-profit whose goal is to funnel casual viewers toward their core right-wing messaging. And that's not an inference on my part, either. I'm not putting words in their mouth or anything. They literally advertise it.
But we have an important question to ask, here: How does PragerU funnel their viewers, and what makes their funnel different from the traditional alt-right pipeline? 

Well, according to their marketing materials, their funnel looks like this: 

The mouth of the funnel opens with 2 types of videos: short "educational" videos and skits. They make 5-minute videos that are meant to look like clear, trustworthy educational resources about current events [put examples on screen] for people who might want to learn more about stuff going on in the news; and then they also make funny little TikToks and quick Man on the Street clips for people looking for laughs. 

Both kinds of videos usually feature caricatures of "leftists" or the most damning sound-bites they could get from left-leaning people, and they're basically saying "Hey, look how wild these opinions are! Aren't you glad you're not as radical as these cuh-raaaazy leftists???", which functions to make their educational content look moderate or to make the left-leaning positions look absurd (and funny).

Once you've seen a couple of these videos, you might think "y'know what? These are pretty funny (or useful) - I want to keep watching," and so you subscribe to their channel. Once they have your subscription, their content shows up on your YouTube home feed, and now you're not just getting their basic, broadly appealing content, but you're also getting their podcasts and their "mini documentaries" and their interviews with conservative figures.

And maybe in one of their videos, they mention how YouTube is "censoring" their content, and that really piques your interest - what could they have said that was so bad that it got removed from the platform??? - so maybe you think "y'know what? Let me check out their website and see if I can find their "censored" content there."

So you go to their website, and you start watching their restricted videos playlist and once you've spent a couple hours there, maybe you sit back and think "y'know what? This is really solid. I can't believe they're being unfairly censored by YouTube - how can I show my support?" 

And so you browse the site and find a big donation link that tells you how, for only $35/month, you can become a member of "PragerUnited" and get quarterly gift boxes and discounts for their merch store (because of course they have a merch store) and other "perks & insider updates."

And suddenly...you've become a paying member of the PragerU family.

Now, this sounds pretty similar to the traditional alt-right pipeline. In the mid-2010s, disinformation and bigotry seemed to reach a fever pitch on YouTube. This was the age of angry, reactionary content creators who were anti-feminist, anti-SJW, and anti-PC. But these creators didn't pull viewers in by immediately inundating them with racist rhetoric or explicit calls-to-violence. They pulled them in using silly comedy videos and webcomics and movie reviews and gaming videos. 

Those were the videos that had mass appeal. And once you'd watched a video about how silly Anita Sarkeesian is, you got a video about "forced diversity" in video games, and then you got one about immigration and "white replacement theory." This is the same exact trajectory as PragerU's content funnel.

New Pipeline
So what makes this new pipeline different from the old one? Well, the old pipeline was built on several different channels all working together to bring people in. The thing about PragerU is that it's more like a traditional media company or TV network. They keep everything in-house. They have a monopoly on the pipeline. It's pretty much just them. And that's dangerous.

PragerU features all these different right-wing creators and academics and speakers and...just...like, normal people under the same banner, with the same sleek editing and consistent branding. They advertise these speakers as "experts" and label themselves as a "university" - if not a legit educational institution, then at least an "alternative" school - that has a budget and is really polished and put-together. 

This consistent branding helps to make all their speakers appear equivalent. PragerU features people from all across the spectrum of right-wing thought, and when they come together under the same banner, it makes them all look...pretty moderate. When you have one video featuring former White House Press Secretary Dana Perino where she gives you advice on how to get through a quarter-life crisis, and then you have another video from noted "political agitator" (NYT) and conspiracy theorist Charlie Kirk, where he explains how colleges and universities are "leftist cults" (PragerU) and "indoctrination centers" (PragerU)...they're on the same playing field, so they must be peers.

A legit educational institution wouldn't platform total radicals, right? I mean, they talk to former white house press secretaries and CEOs and writers and politicians. By putting people like Charlie Kirk and Candace Owens and Steven Crowder next to actual politicians and moderate, establishment republicans, it makes those more radical voices seem...less radical.

In other words:
      "...PragerU's universal design language  -  the consistency of their presentation and branding across videos, regardless of presenter  -  reinforces the notion that all of PragerU's content is equally legitimate. In this way, [more radical figures like] [Dennis] Prager and [Candace] Owens, along with [Ben] Shapiro and [Dave] Rubin are cast as equal participating members of the same institution as Ginni Thomas and Dana Perino... PragerU inculcates a chain of equivalence between the neo-liberalism of Reagan, the neo-conservatism of George W. Bush, the Tea Party, Trumpism, and the key figures of the alt-right... This also obfuscates the distinction between PragerU's mainstream presenters and their radical counterparts, essentially allowing viewers to sleepwalk from established, orthodox conservatism, into radicalism without realizing it.

PragerU's style also makes all these figures appear more qualified. Y'know how people used to make all those fake Abraham Lincoln quotes and put them in those really official-looking meme formats with the big black box next to the portrait? And everyone on Facebook saw it and was like "oh, yeah, that looks real, that's neat." That's what PragerU is doing.

Their channel and website are really polished, with nice, matte colors and consistent branding. Most people know that Prager University isn't a real university, but they really do advertise themselves as an "alternative" educational institution. They're put-together, and when they create content that looks like something a real university would make, their videos are a lot easier to swallow.

      "PragerU unites the American Right, from Reaganist orthodoxy to the alt-right. These ideas are presented using the same branding, and are thus portrayed as equally legitimate, sharing in Prager's "University" status and slick production style. ... PragerU [treats] all its presenters as equal representatives of one institution."
      
Basically, their content looks like something you'd see from Khan Academy or in a TEDTalk. And that makes you trust them the same way you'd trust something that you heard from Khan Academy or in a TEDTalk. It's just that, with PragerU, the people you're listening to aren't experts in their field or qualified scholars. They're news pundits and conspiracy theorists and discredited "academics."
      
So we have these radical right-wing presenters who are featured next to establishment republicans, which makes them seem less radical (they're on the same field as these others, so they can't be that bad, right?) And then those presenters are given the same polish - their radical beliefs are presented in official, sleek infographics. White supremacists don't use infographics. These people are taken seriously by institutions that make cute little animations for them. No one with cute little animations could really be that bad, right?

Well...they are bad. They're just paying their graphic designers to make them look good. But that brings us to our next question: How did they get all this money for graphic designers, anyway? PragerU has a budget of tens of millions of dollars. A lot of this money comes from individual donations and from the conservative donor network. But a lot of their money also comes from...YouTube.

To understand how they took over right-wing YouTube, we first need to understand The Algorithm. So, The Algorithm is built on connections. It's all about finding videos that connect to each other, all about "well, if you like this, then you'll probably like this other thing too." 

(For an example of this, think of the Paul brothers. On their own, they may not have done as well, but because they made similar content and made it really obvious to The Algorithm that they were connected, they were able to bounce off of each other, and they were both able to skyrocket to fame.)

This tactic was also used by the members of the original alt-right pipeline. Like this chart shows, all these various right-wing creators featured each other in their videos, they did collaborations, they went on each other's podcasts. They built each other up.

And this is exactly what PragerU is doing. ...Sort of. See, PragerU isn't shouting out right-wing creators or telling you to subscribe to the Joe Rogan podcast. What PragerU is doing is bringing all of these creators in-house. And because PragerU has all these different videos about different issues and featuring different speakers from different parts of the Right, their videos are recommending more of their own videos. It's all internal. Instead of helping other channels grow, it's all feeding back into itself.

So let's step back and take stock. PragerU is doing the same stuff that the first alt-right pipeline was doing, but doing it all themselves, doing it with a more widely cast net, doing it in a polished, faux-academic style, and exclusively reaping all of the rewards both Algorithmically and monetarily.

In other words:
      "PragerU replicates [the alt-right pipeline], but on a much larger scale. It...broadens the network to include a much wider swathe of the American right; [and] by placing the entire spectrum of right-wing politics under one roof, with identical branding, it inculcates a sense of equivalence... In short, PragerU increases access to the alt-right, and simultaneously mainstreams, legitimizes, and funds it. ... PragerU extends the radicalization pipeline to include the mainstream right [and] seeks to extend it further still, exposing more and more viewers to alt-right thinkers and...`priming' them for even more radical positions. This is, in essence, the clear and present danger that PragerU poses."
What can we do about it? / Conclusion
So what do we do about this? They're obviously bad, and just getting worse as they grow, so we need to find a way to stop them, right? Well, one of the things we can do is...what I'm doing. Response videos are good at raising awareness and making fun of some of the more absurd claims that PragerU makes, but they're also not necessarily serious take-downs of serious issues.

One of the other things we can do as creators is to use some of the tactics they use, but in our own stuff. They have found this great way to help themselves grow and take over The Algorithm. They know how to manipulate those connections that YouTube looks for when figuring out what to recommend to people. Now, I know we can't all feature each other in all our videos, but making more connections and doing more collaborations can only help.

Something else that is severely lacking, though, is scholarly research. I want you to guess how many scholarly papers mention PragerU. Not just about the concept of the alt-right pipeline, not even solely about PragerU, but that just mention PragerU. Guess. 100? 1,000?? More? Put it in the comments.

Well... The answer... Is 5. I can count the number of scholarly papers that mention PragerU on one hand. And two of those papers aren't even published yet. I actually had the opportunity to meet with a few researchers who are really diving into PragerU, and I used two of their (soon-to-be-published?) papers for this video (one of the papers is forthcoming in the journal Patterns of Prejudice, and the other is forthcoming in Identities, but is still in the review process because academic publishing is....a whole thing...). So big shout out to Rob and Tom at the University of Sussex - thank you folks so much for doing this work.

But even with these papers, there is still a massive gap in the research here. And this has some pretty dire implications. Like, if no one questions PragerU, then are they just free to do whatever they want? If no one is keeping tabs on them and measuring the impact they have, then how will we ever really know what kinds of effects their massive media empire has?

This research gap is a huge issue and definitely needs to be addressed. So if you're a social scientist or graduate student who studies this kind of thing, consider diving into the world of PragerU and the effects they have on the New Right, because until we have a handle on who they are and what they're doing, we won't be able to combat their misleading - and often dangerous - misinformation. And if you are interested in doing scholarly research in this area and you want to reach out to the authors of the papers I've cited here, I've been given full permission to post an email  address in the description, so feel free to get in touch with them! (And thanks again to Rob and Tom for sharing their work and being a part of this project!)

The last suggestion I have for how to move forward is to support the folks who are actively working toward changing education - not just providing a counter to PragerU, but actually trying to change the foundation of how we think about education. And that's where The Human Restoration Project comes in. The Human Restoration Project is a non-profit that aims to illuminate, foster, and challenge traditional and progressive educational practices by bringing the humanity back into education.

They have a conference coming up, and they've sponsored today's video so I can spread the word about the event because...I know my audience, I know y'all are nerds and most of you are interested in how we can make systemic change and fix...(motion wildly). 

So the Conference to Restore Humanity is an all-virtual, international conference open to educators at any level, and it's happening from July 25th to the 28th. The folks at HRP believe that an academic conference that's accessible, sustainable, and representative is way overdue, so the Conference to Restore Humanity is their way of combating that, because it's been designed purposefully around accessibility and sustainability of virtual learning - this basically translates to more Q&As and more engagement both during and after the conference.

The content covered during the conference includes restorative justice, anti-racism, anti-carceral education, childism, neurodivergence in schools, and going gradeless (which y'all know I'm definitely here for).  So if you're an educator interested in learning about and discussing these topics with other educators, then this is the conference for you!

If this sounds like something you want to get in on, then go to humanrestoriationproject.org/conference, which I have linked in the description, and use promo code ZOEBEE to get $25 off your ticket price. I'll be getting a little kickback if you use this code when you get your tickets, so not only will you get a discount, but you'll also be helping support the channel!

Again, that's humanrestorationproject.org/conference, using promo code ZOEBEE, and if you want to learn more about the awesome folks over at the Human Restoration Project, then you can follow them on Twitter at @HumResPro, and I also have lots of resources from their site linked in the description if you want to dive deeper into human-centered education.

Anyway, thanks again to the folks at the Human Restoration Project for sponsoring this video!

What this all comes down to, though, is that there is no one solution. We can't just do response videos or just mimic their tactics or just publish research or just do conferences. PragerU is uniting the right, and if we want to have any chance of beating them at their own game, we need to unite, too.

If we want to understand the political shifts that have been happening in earnest since 2016, if we want to understand the rise in violence against women and LGBTQ people and people of color, if we want to understand and avoid these things, we cannot afford to overlook PragerU's role in far-right discourse. This pipeline still exists. And that's a problem. But it's a problem that we can fix, together.
Outro and Poem
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! I have lots more videos coming this summer - like, seriously, I have, like...9 videos planned for the next couple months - so be sure to subscribe and ring the bell so you can stay notified when those videos are posted!

This video wouldn't have been possible without the support from my wonderful Patrons over on Patreon, as well as my Channel Members here on YouTube, and I want to give a special shout-out to A Tasty Snack, Adam, Al Sweigart, Andrew, Dylan, Justin Lowery, Robert Bradford, Science Punk Sellout, and Will Swanson. Thank you all so very, very much.

If you want to join all these wonderful folks scrolling here beside me, then check out the links in the description to see how you can get early access to videos, join our patron-only discord server, or have a custom poem written just for you.

Speaking of, today's poem patron is Ash Wetzel, and for you, Ash, here is "on the potato that sprouted from the pile of rot under the kitchen window where we threw our food scraps":



on the potato that sprouted from the pile of rot under the kitchen window where we threw our food scraps


We started doing it after the chickens died
	throwing all the potato peels and banana peels and corn husks out the window

We expected them to break down into to nothing
	to melt into the dead grass
	and return to whence they came

We found the first sprout the next spring
	it was potatoes
		it was clumps of green among the brown and speckles
		it was almost-basil leaves hiding
			potatoes
				potato
					just one potato

We pulled it up and brought it in
	washed off the soil
		(and what else?)

We questioned if it was safe to eat
	was its rotten earth somehow part of it, now?
	if I bit into its too-white flesh
		would it be soft and grainy?
		would it squish between my lips 
            give way under my teeth 
            melt into the sour sludge that oozes out from under the pile of refuse where it grew?
                  If something is born from garbage, is it itself garbage?
                  Does where you plant your roots decide what makes its way into your veins?

We fried it up
	our garbage-born potato
	with homegrown ramps and our good olive oil
		and threw its skin out the window
			to be reborn
				again
					and again




And, until next time... Stay safe, stay warm, and I'll see y'all again soon, I hope.

Bye, folks :)
Puns are Good, Actually
Aside 1
      "It will doubtless be the opinion of many a reader that a Prefatory Essay on such a subject as Punning can possess little of interest, and nothing of novelty. I would, however, request any one entertaining this idea to suspend his judgment till he has given the matter ampler consideration....
      Still... It has been too much the case to treat it with levity and inconsiderateness; to regard it as mere trifling; to view it at best as a feeble missile from the armoury of wit...and which those who are qualified to wield more valuable weapons would scarcely deign to employ.
      I trust that, in the course of these introductory observations, I shall effectually dispel all such erroneous prejudices, and shall satisfactorily assert the true dignity of the art, so that my readers may join with me in exclaiming, [pause for effect] - puns are good, actually." - The Punster's Pocketbook
Anti-Pun PSA Section
Intro/The Danger of Puns
Hi, I'm Zoe Bee. And today I want to talk to you about a dangerous substance terrorizing our streets.
[hold up bottle] This... is a really cute little bottle, isn't it? Well, what I'm here to talk about isn't cute, but it is small. Small enough you can't even see it. 
There is an invisible enemy that walks among us, that sneaks into our conversations, that makes its way into books and articles and Tweets...and even video essays.
It warps our minds, leaves us vulnerable, and lowers our standards for comedy.
This scourge on our community is - of course -  puns.
      Let me lay down the law upon the subject.... A pun is primâ facie an insult to the person you are talking with.  It implies utter indifference to or sublime contempt for his remarks, no matter how serious. To trifle with the vocabulary which is the vehicle of social intercourse is to tamper with the currency of human intelligence. 
      ("The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table" - Oliver Wendell Holmes)
In other words... Puns are dangerous. When people play with language - the most important tool we have, the thing that allows us to communicate with one another - then they're willing to do...anything. Nothing is sacred to them.
To explain what exactly puns do that make them so dangerous, I'd like to tell you the story of Mr. Pun.
Mr. Pun was a bitter old man. He was so bitter because while all his neighbors were funny, fun-loving people, Mr. Pun was cursed with the inability to tell a joke.
This curse brought a lot of pain into Mr. Pun's life, and eventually he was consumed by it, and saw no outlet except to force that pain upon the lives of everyone else around him.
Mr. Pun made it his life's work to root out all the fun, beautiful humor in the world and corrupt it. He made a mockery of jokes: whenever he heard someone about to tell a joke, he would rudely jump into the conversation and shout out a nonsense sentence about some unrelated homophone, totally derailing the entire conversation - all because he simply wasn't born with the finesse, timing, and ability to read people that one requires to be a comedian.
He started by preying on children. He would go up to their homes, knock twice, and if a child answered the door, he would begin indoctrinating them into his school of comedy. Their simple, innocent minds were no match for the silly gibberish that made up Mr. Pun's attempts at humor.
This, of course, was where the modern scourge known as "knock-knock jokes" was born.
After corrupting children, he moved on to adults, and worked toward ruining all forms of humor. Mr. Pun hated that comedy could be complex, high-brow commentary, so he spread his own corrupted version of "comedy" - if you could even call it that - that was lazy, thoughtless, and simple.
Where jokes brought people together, Mr. Pun drove them apart.
His corruption of humor, called "puns," even caused people pain. And that's why, even today, the most common reaction to a pun is a groan.
Puns are dangerous. It's as simple as that.
So...if you've woken up with the sudden urge to open a seaside coffee-shop called "The Rise and Brine," or if your child has been watching episodes of "Between the Lions" for 36 hours straight, then this video is for you.
I just hope it's not too late.
Transition Between Sections
But if puns are so dangerous [begin the transition], then why is this video in support of them? I mean, it is called "Puns are Good, Actually" and I did open with that whole quote about how "yknow, you should really give puns a chance!".
And obviously that whole sketch was a joke, but there is a real, serious history of puns, and they really are considered the lowest form of humor.
But... I also just... kinda love puns. In spite of all the bad press.
All this fearmongering about puns is misguided, and we need to redirect our perspectives and chart a course toward appreciating this wildly underappreciated form of wordplay. And since, as we all know, I am very funny - definitely very good at telling jokes - I'll be your captain on this cruise across the vast Pun-cific Ocean. 
And since I am very quickly reaching the extent of my knowledge of...boat...words (?), let's hoist the anchor, raise the sails, and set our sights for the unexplored wilds of wordplay. 
Without further ado... Let's go.
Aside 2:
      "Let criticks (sic) say what they will, I will venture to affirm, that Punning, of all arts and sciences, is the most extraordinary: for all others are circumscribed by certain bounds; but this alone is found to have no limits, because to excel therein requires a more extensive knowledge of all things." - Jonathan Swift, Ars Punica
Real Stuff Section
What is a pun?
The first question to ask is "What even is a pun?" because it turns out there are a lot of different definitions of puns, and even experts can't really agree on a single meaning.
Even when I polled my followers on Twitter (go follow me on Twitter @Zoe_TheBee), there were a ton of different positions. Some people think puns are when two words that sound the same are used interchangeably, while others think it's when you replace one word with another that sounds sort of similar, and others think "pun" encompasses all wordplay.
I fall in this last camp, as do a lot of pun researchers. To us, a pun happens pretty much any time there is an expectation of one sound or meaning, and then a different sound or meaning is used in its place, usually in a way that relates to the content or context of the statement. It's basically a linguistic bait-and-switch.
And because this definition is so broad, pun scholars have to organize puns into different categories just to keep everything straight.
I won't go into every single category in excruciating detail, but I will give a brief overview of the main ones so we're all on the same page about what I mean when I say "pun."
So, the most common type are homographic puns, which occur when there's a word with multiple meanings, and both meanings could apply, like if I said that mathematicians make good pilots because they spend a lot of time with planes. (pause for laughter)
Then there's the second most common type, which are homophonic puns, and these show up whenever you use two similar-sounding words with different meanings, like "Camping is really hard-core. Y'know, it's in tents."
These can be further broken down into paradigmatic puns, which require some outside knowledge to understand (like the mathematician-pilot joke, which required that you know that "plane" can refer to aircraft or to flat, infinite, 2-dimensional geometric surfaces), and syntagmatic puns, which give the reader sufficient context to understand the pun on its own, like if I said "The wedding was so beautiful, the bride was in tears...and the cake was in tiers, too!" It reveals itself to be a pun.
Now there's also a lot of different kinds of wordplay that are connected to puns. First, we have Spoonerisms, meld puns, and Portmanteaus, which all occur whenever parts of words are smashed into other parts of words to create new Frankenstein's-monster-words, like "brunch," "staycation," or the Shel Silverstein book "Runny Babbit."
There's also story puns, which are some of my favorites, and they're either drawn-out puns or they take idioms or well-known phrases and flip them around, like this scene from Deadpool (https://youtu.be/PuaFfjf598I?t=12).
There's also Wellerisms and Tom Swifties, which are puns that show up in prepositional phrases and dialogue tags, like "`I see,' said the blind man, as he picked up his hammer and saw," and "`My shirt needs pressing,' the bare-chested man observed ironically."
And last but not least, we have knock-knock jokes. Yes, even knock-knock jokes are related to puns. 
...Orange you glad we're done with this section?
Here's why you should like puns:
   1.    Bad Reasoning
      Now that we've finished defining puns, we can start defending them, and the first step in proving that puns are good is to talk about why people think they're bad in the first place.
         a.          History
            The idea that puns are bad is relatively recent, in the grand scheme of the history of human language, and this wave of anti-pun sentiment - at least in the West - actually popped up during the Age of Enlightenment.
            Pre-Enlightenment - a time also known as the English Renaissance - was a heyday for puns. And puns, in this era, weren't just for humor; they were seen by many as similar to metaphor or poetry - they were rhetorical devices that speakers could use to say two things at once, and the ability to seamlessly weave puns into your prose was revered and respected. 
            This golden age of puns was also the time that Shakespeare was writing in, and he and other writers like him really had their fingers on the pulse of the culture of the British Empire. All sorts of classes and genders and dialects were mixing together and rubbing off on one another, and that led to an explosion of culture, and the English language blossomed into a...really weird, kinda messy, but beautiful flower.
            ...that was then hacked off, pulped, and juiced, before having a label slapped onto it and being peddled by unhappy 30-somethings in department stores that smell like $200 handbags and sell overpriced perfume in a desperate attempt to stay in business.
            Y'know... Capitalism.
            The 17th and 18th centuries were known as the Age of Enlightenment, and it was a time of discovery - both geographical and scientific - and many of the philosophical and political treatises written by great Enlightenment thinkers are still used as the basis of science, philosophy, and politics in Western nations.
            But along with this focus on industry, science, rationality, and prosperity came some... less-than-desirable side-effects.
            See, mercantilism was on the rise as the British Empire sought to expand foreign trade (and their global influence), and with this sort of proto-capitalism came a widening divide between rich and poor.
            One way that the new wealthy class distinguished themselves was through etiquette, or the social rules of politeness. Enlightenment thinkers valued rationality over emotions, reason over feeling, and - in practice - this meant controlling your impulses and acting (or at least appearing) as refined and restrained as possible.
            Compared to the bold and bawdy, rowdy and randy sensibilities of Shakespeare's day, these new Enlightenment folks were pretty much just a bunch of pretentious pricks. And, even worse, they were a bunch of painfully unfunny pretentious pricks.
            Where Shakespeare thrived on puns, double-entendre, and sex jokes, 18th century gentlemen preferred more high-brow, civilized entertainment:
                  "Frequent and loud laughter is the characteristic of folly and ill-manners; it is the manner in which the mob express their silly joy at silly things; and they call it being merry. In my mind there is nothing so illiberal, and so ill-bred, as audible laughter."
            What this meant for puns, though, is that they were dismissed as being childish and silly. They were the jokes of the unintelligent underclass. After all, anyone could pun, from the most revered playwrights to the illiterate dockworkers - but if anyone could pun, then how valuable could it be, right?
            To make matters worse, when the first English language dictionary was published in 1775, the spelling, pronunciation, and meanings of words became more standardized, which clashed with the innate linguistic fluidity of puns.
            Language was being stratified and codified - there were now rigid rules for what words meant and how they should be written and spoken, and there were even more unspoken, social rules for what you could say in certain situations or with certain company.
            All of this cultural, economic, and linguistic change meant that puns were condemned to live out their days in children's joke books and working class households, and any respect they got was given by academic outcasts, outspoken - if inflammatory - thinkers and writers who still believed in the power of puns, despite the scorn of their contemporaries.
            So...because of the Enlightenment, puns lost all the rhetorical prestige they had built up over literally thousands of years, the pretentious positions of the pompous pricks in power became standard practice, and the rest - as they say - is history.
         b.          Theory of Humor
            But Zoe! - I hear you say - just because capitalism and Enlightenment values - including a disdain for puns - have stuck around, that doesn't necessarily mean there's no other good reasons to dislike puns! I mean, puns are bad. They're just not funny. There's no arguing with that.
            Well, hypothetical viewer, let's explore that a little more.
            So, without getting into all the different theories of humor - that's a topic for a future video *WINK* - I want to give a brief overview of what makes things funny.
            The prevailing theory is incongruity theory, which roughly means that things are funny because they subvert expectations - you expect one situation, get a different situation, and that realization and reconciliation is what produces the feeling of amusement.
            Puns very obviously fit this mold. When you hear a pun in its most basic form - like "The architect wasn't able to break out of prison, because the walls weren't built to scale." - your brain processes one possible meaning of the punned-upon word ("to scale" meaning to climb), and then when you realize there's a pun, you're forced to recognize the other meaning of the word ("scale" as in size and proportion), and that disconnect --> reconnect process is precisely what incongruity theory is about.
            But this doesn't mean that every pun is funny just because it sets up a situation and then subverts it. In fact, a lot of puns fail.
            ...but a lot of jokes fail, too. And for a lot of the same reasons:
            Humor falls flat when it fails to be incongruous - when it doesn't subvert any expectations. This happens a lot with puns, because the easiest puns to make are the most obvious to spot. 
            But this isn't exclusive to puns. Jokes fall prey to the exact same issue. Ever wonder why a lot of older comedy isn't funny anymore? And no - the answer isn't "because cancel-culture and political correctness". Those jokes aren't funny because we've heard them all a hundred times.
            Like, you know how boring it is to hear "Father, I cannot click the book" or "Ha! Woman can't drive!" for the thousandth time? Those jokes aren't funny because they don't subvert any expectations.
            I mean, they're also just kinda shitty, but the main point is that they aren't doing anything new and interesting.
            Puns can also fail when they aren't tied to context. Like if I were to just - out of the blue - pull out a jar of spices and say "Wow, I've really got a lot of thyme on my hands," that's not funny because it's just...like... yeah, those two words sound the same, but that has nothing to do with our conversation.
            [Look down at thyme-covered hands] Okay, now I need to figure out what to do with all this stuff on me. [Look around for paper towel] Ah, shit, I forgot to get a towel. Man, I'm really in a jam [editing magic to put me in a jar of jam].
            But regular jokes can also fall prey to this.
            In other words: Yeah, puns may not always be hilarious. But neither are jokes. It's just that no one uses the existence of bad jokes as evidence that the entire concept of jokes are bad and unfunny and their existence should be purged from the entire language.
            In reality, puns and jokes can hardly even be compared. So stop saying that puns aren't funny, when your standard for humor is "jokes". Puns and jokes aren't the same thing.
            Saying "puns aren't funny jokes" is like saying "pies aren't good soups." Like...yeah, that's because they're two different things. Sometimes they share ingredients, sometimes they share flavors, sometimes they can be eaten together. But they do different things and have different purposes and are just fundamentally different.
            Just like the best apple pie is still a shitty clam chowder, so too is the greatest pun not necessarily the funniest joke.
            
But Zoe! I hear you shout yet again. Just because people's reasons for believing puns are bad are, themselves, bad, that doesn't necessarily mean puns are good.
And yes, dear listener, you're right. There's a huge difference between "not bad" and "actually good."
So let's talk about what makes puns actually good.
   2.    Charm and Flavor
      Now, this might be a cop-out answer, but the first reason puns are good, actually is because they're just...like... fun. And when they're used in writing, they make that text fun, too.
      There isn't really a science to this - I mean, we'll get to the science if you want science; trust me, I have plenty of science - but puns are just fun.
      For thousands of years, writers have been incorporating puns and other wordplay into their writing because it adds charm and flavor to the text. It's well-known that Shakespeare liked his double-entendre, but he was far from the first - or last - writer to use puns in their work.
      Others, like Jonathan Swift and Oscar Wilde - both Irish and both incredibly witty - built their careers off of puns (I mean, Wilde wrote a whole play off of the idea that "Earnest'' can be both a name and an adjective). Puns are especially prevalent in children's literature, like Alice in Wonderland and The Phantom Tollbooth, where the main character goes on a magical adventure with Tok the watchdog (literally a watch-dog) where they meet a Spelling Bee and part of the kingdom is ruled by a "mathemagician". Seriously, The Phantom Tollbooth is the most underrated kids' book, and I could honestly do an entire video on how incredible it is - I love it so. much.
      Puns make writing pop. You know what else they make pop? Music. ...Pop music.
      A ton of popular music is built on puns. 
      The example that always pops - hah - into my head is Eminem's "Now you get to watch her leave / Out the window, guess that's why they call it window pane," but there's also Jay-Z's "Brooklyn," where he says "I Brooklyn Dodger them / I Jack, I Rob, I sin, / Ah man, I'm Jackie Robinson" - which is, like, 4 puns in one, and it's absolutely incredible.
      "Colors" by the Black Pumas isn't just about the beauty of sunsets and the changing leaves, but also the beauty of human diversity.
      The "blues" in Johnny Cash's "Folsom Prison Blues," refers to the style of music, the sadness and frustration that come from incarceration, and the color of the inmates' uniforms; and there's also a song about a double-date gone wrong called "You Can't Have Your Kate and Edith Too."
      Oh, and the Beatles. The Beatles is a pun. Literally one of the most famous and most popular and most influential bands in the history of the world have a pun for a name.
      I can't make this shit up.
      Everyone puns - your favorite writers and musicians pun all the time, and you probably enjoy it. Even if you think you don't like puns.
      All of these incredible artists didn't think that puns were too "low" for them to use in their art. And we - all of us who appreciate their work - are better off for it. 
      Puns add fun and flavor and heart 
      to books and music and art. 
      They make writing fun;
      We should value the pun
      ...or stop hating it, just for a start
   3.    Brain Juice
      But Zoe! What do puns actually do? Like, yeah, they're in all of these books and plays and songs, but why is that good?
      That's a great question, hypothetical viewer. Let me tell you. But before we can jump into puns we first need to dive into some cognitive linguistics and talk a little bit about how our brains process language.
      As I've talked about before on this channel, we have lazy brains. Our brains really like taking the path of least resistance at every possible opportunity, and language processing is no different.
      When we process language, we fill in gaps and make a ton of assumptions and predictions. Think of your brain like...Google. When you Google something, even if none of your words are spelled right and your search looks like total nonsense, Google still knows exactly what you were trying to say. ...most of the time.
      Our brains do this, too. I'm sure you've seen those viral pictures where there's a sentence where every word has its letters rearranged, but yet we are still able to read it (if we're fluent speakers of the language, at least). That's your brain making assumptions and filling in gaps, using what it knows about the subconscious rules of language.
      Your brain knows what common words and phrases are, and it knows where words usually appear in sentences, and it does all these probability calculations in a fraction of a second, and suddenly what was once gibberish is now actually readable.
      Well, your brain does a similar thing when you hear people speaking. You know the whole "laurel / yanny" thing that went viral a couple years ago? This phenomenon - where two people can hear two wildly different things - is just what happens when your brain tries to make sense of ambiguous stuff.
      Your brain also does its own version of Google's auto-complete. When you start typing in the search bar, Google starts auto-completing your search string based on statistics and other common searches. And when you hear someone speak, your brain does the exact same thing.
      You know what common words and phrases are, and so if your brain can fill in a conversation with those common words and phrases that you have stored in your mental storeroom, then it doesn't have to waste energy on actually listening to and processing every single word you hear
      But this is where puns come and throw a wrench into things. Because when there's a pun - when we sense that a sentence has some kind of double-meaning - we have to do a double-take. Because when there's a pun, we can't rely on the most common meaning of a word, because the most common meaning isn't the only meaning being used in the sentence.
      To quote noted pun-scholar John Pollack:
            "Upon hearing an ambiguous word...the brain must work backward to make its best educated guess about the speaker's intent, including the possibility that this intent is to convey multiple meanings. [But] the human brain can't necessarily rely on the frequency of a word's most common use to make its best estimate. Instead, it has to qualitatively judge all available evidence to resolve the apparent incongruity....It's the brain's ability to quickly recognize the incongruous interpretations and catch the unexpected secondary meanings that imbues them with humor."
      And this is what allows puns to actually help exercise our brains and stretch our language processing muscles. Because usually when we're confronted with ambiguity -  if someone mispronounces something, or if there's a typo, or if we simply mishear a word - we know that there is only one "right" answer. And once we've figured out what the word was supposed to be, we can move on.
      But not so with puns. Because with puns, both meanings of a word are important. To quote Pollack again:
            "Puns require the brain to maintain multiple meanings of a word simultaneously, rather than simply suppressing the competition or choosing an outright winner, as it often does when confronted with ambiguity."
      In other words, puns are good for our brains because they force us to consider not just one meaning of a word, but all meanings of words, and hold all those meanings in our brain at once, and carefully consider each one, testing not just our vocabulary, but our understanding of double entendre, subtlety, and idioms.
      In this way, puns are like riddles or lateral thinking puzzles. When we're "solving" puns, we have to think about things differently than we normally do - we have to think outside our normal linguistic "box," we have to find connections between otherwise unconnected words and ideas, make creative and abstract associations - and it turns out that's actually really good for our brains. 
      Punning stretches our cognitive muscles and makes us better word...people. Word users? Worders? Worders. It makes us better worders.
      It turns out that this mental exercise is actually part of what has allowed humans to do all the cool, creative, innovative stuff we've been doing for thousands of years. As John Pollack puts it:
            "The remarkable human capacity for creative, abstract association [is the] same ability that enabled someone to see a rolling log and conceptualize a wheel...[Punning is] about freeing our imagination to leap from one idea to the next to the next, even when those leaps seem illogical or impossible. And it is precisely that capacity to link wildly disparate ideas that enabled people, through thousands of generations of trial and error, to move from cave to skyscraper to space station, and from drum to telegraph to iPhone. The pun [is]...a way to identify and articulate potential connections that aren't necessarily or immediately apparent...[and] it is this same urge to imagine, explore and establish new connections that fuels creativity generally, and science specifically. "
      The same cognitive muscles we stretch to make puns are also used to do science and create inventions and come up with new and innovative solutions to really big problems. If, according to the Encyclopedia of Creativity, "humor and creativity share similar cognitive, behavioral, and emotional processes that give the two parallel psychological implications," then puns are a really important part of how our brains work.
      So, to answer the question from earlier: Why are puns good? Puns are good because they help us stretch our language-processing and problem-solving muscles, and they actually represent just how amazing our brains are. 
      To quote the ever-eloquent Zoe Bee, puns make us better worders.
   4.    Censorship
      Puns don't just help with this abstract, internal, individual stuff, though. They actually play a really important part in culture, as well.
      One of the things puns are particularly useful for is subversive language. If you want to make a point about an off-limits topic or if you want to insult someone but you want to have plausible deniability, then puns are the tool for you.
      Writers and artists throughout history have used puns and other related wordplay to get around censors and breach taboo subjects. Shakespeare did it all the time to subvert the censorship imposed by England's "Master of the Revels," - the guy whose whole job was to decide what was acceptable for the sensitive and innocent eyes of the public to see. 
      Apparently, sexy stuff was a little too risque for 16th century audiences, because in order to keep his plays within the legal limit, Shakespeare had to hide his dick jokes in the comforting folds of crafty wordplay.
      ~ bleh. I hate myself for writing that. ~
      If you want to read more about that, I recommend A Dictionary of Shakespeare's Sexual Puns and Their Significance, written by Franken Rubenstein, who must have the world's coolest job.
      Anyway, these puns-by-necessity didn't disappear over the 400-or-so years since Shakespeare's time. And while the position of "Master of the Revels" stopped being a thing in the late 1700's, there are still people who are employed to decide what kind of language is or is not allowed to be used in art.
      Today, those people are known here in the US as the Federal Communications Commission, and while the Communications Act of 1934 prohibits the FCC from censoring broadcasts, there are still a fair amount of rules on what's allowed to be broadcast and when.
      The Communications Act protects "indecent" and "profane" material - that is, material that shows sex organs or includes language that's "considered a public nuisance" - though that kind of material is only allowed to be shown late at night, in order to minimize the risk of children watching. Because won't someone think of the children!
      This sounds all well and good, but, the FCC is allowed to censor "obscene" material, since it - apparently - isn't covered by the First Amendment. According to the FCC website, "obscene" material "must meet a three-pronged test established by the Supreme Court: It must appeal to an average person's prurient interest; ("prurient" meaning "sexual") depict or describe sexual conduct in a `patently offensive' way; and, taken as a whole, lack serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value."
      So, basically, "obscene" content gets bonked and sent to horny jail.
      Anyway, even the relatively mild "indecent" and "profane" material has limits. If a TV show, for instance, includes this kind of material, then they have two choices: Either it can only be shown between the hours of 10 pm and 6 am, or, if they want to show it during prime hours, they have to self-censor the material.
      Most shows choose the latter, because execs don't want to miss out on those sweet, sweet advertising dollars. But that doesn't necessarily mean those shows go quietly. Many TV show writers try to push the boundaries and test the limits of what's allowed to be shown, and often poke fun at the seemingly arbitrary rules of the FCC.
      And one of the best ways to do this is through - you guessed it - puns. 
      Because puns are inherently duplicitous - that is, they say two things at once - they are the perfect tool for people trying to say something on the down-low, while on the surface it looks innocent.
      One show that does this particularly well is Arrested Development, which is chock full of all kinds of puns. There's the "loose seal" running gag, the potentially taboo relationship between George-Michael and his "cousin, maybe," and also literally the name of the show - like it's called Arrested Development, which is a psychology term that could describe really any of the main characters, but also it's about a family who do crimes related to housing developments and also the first episode literally opens with an arrest, so the main development that incites the rest of the show is someone getting arrested.
      Anyway, the puns in Arrested Development aren't just these fun, silly, harmless ones. They also use puns to poke fun at the seemingly arbitrary rules for what is and is not considered profane language.
      For instance, in one episode in Season 3, the show highlights how some words that seem offensive in some contexts aren't offensive in other contexts. And I'm afraid to say the word because in American English the word they use is offensive and the almighty algorithm might not be happy with it, but I'm sure my wonderful editor is flashing it on screen right now.
      (show clip)
      This is just one example of how the writers on Arrested Development used wordplay to question the validity of profanity rules. And while Arrested Development wasn't the first or last show to do this kind of thing, they did help shift perspectives and bring about a new age of content regulation, where the rules are starting to become a little more lax.
      Before this show, censorship regulation was sort of stuck and couldn't change. Like, they were - y'know - fixed in one position. Like, restrained in their growth.
      (show clip)
      Arrested Development and TV content guidelines are just the tip of the proverbial pun-berg, though, because wordplay has also been used by groups around the world to protest even stronger and more dangerous kinds of censorship.
      In Nazi Germany, there were "Whisper Jokes" or Flüsterwitze (I apologize to all my German viewers for what I imagine was a horrid pronunciation of that word). But these whisper jokes were little puns and other wordplay that people would make criticizing Hitler and other leaders.
      For instance, as one joke goes, an art collector had acquired some portraits of Adolf Hitler, Herman Göring and Joseph Goebbels, but she wasn't sure how to display them, so she went to her friend and asked "Well, what do you think: should we hang them or put them up against the wall?"
      During the Cold War, people made similar jokes about the paranoia-induced breaches of civil liberties in nations like the US and UK. When the government placed signs in the London Underground telling citizens to "Be Alert!" angsty British youths decided to take the concept and run with it, graffiti-ing responses like "No, this country has enough lerts. Be a loof instead."
      And American poet Louis Untermeyer had a famous love for puns, and when he once quipped that he thought "Trotzky's idea of teaching the young socialists how to shoot [was] `a poor piece of Marxmanship.'" he was investigated by the House UnAmerican Activities Committee and fired from his job as a TV gameshow host.
      In China, activists used puns to protest the Tiananmen Square massacre by smashing small bottles onto the ground, which only makes sense when you realize that the name of China's leader at that time, Den Xiaoping, sounds a lot like the word for "little bottle," or xiao pingzi.
      Even today Chinese citizens are using puns to fight back against injustices and censorship. One of the biggest, loudest, and most public pun-protests is the "Grass Mud Horse"
      The Grass Mud Horse looked like a silly kids' song about a family of alpaca-like creatures that lived in peace until they were attacked by river crabs, but then once they defeated the terrible river crabs, they could finally live in peace again.
      Now, this definitely sounds like a weird little kids' song, right? But, to quote an explanation of the song: 
            "Its subversion lies in the fact that, while the printed characters for Grass Mud Horse are benign, the spoken words sound like the Mandarin for `fuck your mother.' In the very popular YouTube hit, a children's chorus sings of the animal's virtues. At the same time, the lyrics are crude puns about a woman's anatomy, mother-son incest, and the way the Grass Mud Horses defeated invading `river crabs.' [And] `river crabs' sounds like the Mandarin word for harmony, which is the government's favorite justification (and common euphemism) for censorship."
      In other words, they created an entire """"kids song"""" to get away with saying otherwise censored words while having plausible deniability and simultaneously protesting the so-called "harmony" imposed on them by the government.
      Clearly, puns are powerful. They allow us to tease rigid regimes and laugh in the face of seemingly inescapable injustices. If the outright activism of protest is speaking truth to power, then the subtler, more subversive activism of puns is telling jokes to power.
      Puns are a way to express frustration and knock the powerful down a few pegs without actually getting in trouble, because the very nature of puns gives you plausible deniability.
      Puns can legitimately change the world.
   5.    Playfulness
      ...but not everything has to be so serious all the time, right? Because while puns can do all this amazing stuff like making big political statements against powerful regimes and highlighting the intricate complexities of the human brain... They don't have to.
      Because what puns excel at the most...is play.
      At their core, puns are about playfulness. They're about taking two disparate ideas and finding where they overlap, and taking advantage of that overlap to bring some whimsy into the world.
      And I think this is why people don't like puns. Not only is it the pretentious classism that's a hold-over from the Enlightenment days, but it's also because puns are childish.
      And when I say "childish" I really do mean "in the manner of children." But I don't mean it as a pejorative like most people do. To most people, kid stuff is stupid and meaningless and naive and not the realistic, serious stuff of the real world.
      But to me, childishness is playful curiosity. Childishness is about looking at the world like you're seeing everything for the first time. And when you see connections between things - it's about finding joy and beauty in it.
            "Puns...play a formative role in childhood development, by revealing the relationship between words, sounds, context and meaning. Knock-knock jokes and riddles that children learn on the playground usually turn on puns. For example, what has four wheels and flies? A garbage truck.
            As children gleefully learn to spot and evaluate secondary meanings in common words and phrases, they're really learning how to think critically. To get the joke, they have to overlook the obvious to explore other possible interpretations of what they have just heard.
            Though often dismissed as juvenile, riddles and knock-knock jokes actually require significant powers of abstraction, a deliberate subversion of rules, and a special appreciation for surprise."
      Play - both physical play and wordplay - are how we figure things out. It's how we experiment and take risks. Play is at the core of the human experience. And puns, at their core, are playful.
      Why else would so many characters and catchphrases be puns? Seriously, think of any superhero, and their name - or their catchphrase - is probably a pun.
      Or, better yet, think of Pokemon. One of the most successful, most ubiquitous and most well-loved series on the face of the earth, and every single one - from your Bulbasaur to your Calyrex - is a pun.
      Bulbasaur - objectively the best Gen 1 starter - is a bulb, and a dinosaur, and also kind of bulbous. Pikachu gets its name from combining the Japanese onomatopoeias for the sound of a spark and the squeak of a mouse. Even the word "Pokemon" is a pun: a combination of "pocket" and "monster."
      Pun-related wordplay is everywhere. And for good reason. Because it's fun. Because it's interesting. Because it's a way to bring charm and complexity and just a little bit of chaos into our lives.
            "Inevitably, some people will never like punning because it fogs up the lens of clarity through which they view the world and impose order, or at least the illusion of order. But if puns seem, at times, to confuse, they actually enlighten us through both laughter and insight. They keep us from taking ourselves too seriously, and sharpen our capacity for creative thinking. Ultimately, puns keep our minds alert, engaged and nimble in this quickening world, revealing new connections and fresh interpretations. And that's why, even as we hurtle into a future of uncertain opportunities, puns will always be more than some antics."
Conclusion/Wrap-Up
All this is to say: Puns are great, y'all.
They're not the lowest form of humor, and they're not lazy, and they're not stupid. They're a vital part of the history of language, they do really cool stuff for our art and our brains and our societies, and on top of that they're just...fun.
So, the next time someone groans at a pun or you feel like you have to apologize for making one, remember that there is no shame in punning. You're simply following in the tradition of some of the best artists and writers and musicians and exercising your brain and bringing more joy into the world while you're at it.
Because puns aren't bad.
They're actually good.
--oh wait, shit, that's not the title, it was supposed to be-----
Final Aside: 
      "Gentle reader, whosoever thou art, receive in good part what we have here written; imbue thyself with such a love of punning, and such a sense of its dignity, that thy efforts may exalt and not degrade it: so shalt thou merit the good wish which, with a sincere heart, we now bestow upon thee: Mayest thou become one of the warmest admirers of punning, and shine as one of the first of punsters!" - from Ars Punica

End Crawl
Thanks & Patrons
Thank you so much for watching to the end of the video! I know this one took a while, but I moved and also started working with a new editor and it was a whole thing, but I hope you enjoyed it!
If you did, be sure to like and comment and subscribe and do all those YouTube things. And if you've enjoyed the editing, be sure to leave some love in the comments for my wonderful friend Charlie Flowers, without whom this video wouldn't exist.
And, of course, I want to give a huge shout-out to the incredibly talented Aud for the art she did for this video; and to the Armchair Egyptologist who supplied his wonderfully British voice to my voiceover. And if you'd like to help support me so I can continue to work with awesome folks like these and keep making videos full-time, then come on over to Patreon, linked in the description below.
This video also wouldn't have been possible without the support from:
Sigve, A Tasty Snack, Comrade Fox, Robert Bradford, Jameson Huddle, Dylan, Adam, Al Sweigart, Matheson Bayley, and Science Punk Sellout. Thank you all so very much.
And, last but not least, we have our Patron Poem of the video. This one is for Sethzard, and it's called "Linguist's Pride"
Poem
Linguist's Pride (for Sethzard)
Did you know there are over a million words in the English language?
Which sounds like a lot
until you remember 
only 17% of those million are in use
and a single person only knows about 15% of that 17%
and then we're at only 2(1/2)% and suddenly we feel 
very small.

In an infinitely expanding universe
how could we even imagine finding a word
- not even a word, just a sound - 
for All the Things and the colors we'll never see
and the plants that will be born 
ten thousand years after the last great-granddaughter
of the last Earth-bound human dies.

And even knowing how insufficient our words are,
knowing how short we come to speaking the names of All the Things,
knowing how the Universe sees the hubris of linguists 
as the ambitions of a child who hasn't yet seen the stars,
Somehow there are still people
who hate the word
Moist.

I kind of wanted to end with reading puns, and I even did a whole Patreon post a couple weeks ago asking people for puns that would go in the video, but I don't know where it could fit in.
I wonder if maybe it would work better as written things? Like, after the Patron credit scroll, we could put their puns on screen? (Or, honestly, if the credits don't take up the whole screen, we could have those on one side, and the puns on the other? I don't know. Whatever you think is best.)
The Easiest Job in the World | YouTube Meta
Intro
Hello, everyone, and welcome to YouTube Meta - the series where I talk about YouTube, The Algorithm, and what it's like being a content creator. Today, we're going to be looking at the easiest job in the content creation world, talking about why it could be toxic, and figuring out what we can do about it.
Let's dive in, shall we?
The Problem
React content. React content has been one of the big boogeymen of the internet for decades, and debates and discussions over whether reactions are legal or fair or valuable are all over YouTube. But why? Why is this such a contentious topic, and what is the future of this kind of content?
Some of the first controversies were regarding whether it was legal to show other people's content in your own, or to react to videos at all, and if you want a rundown of this period in "react drama history" then check out Jay Exci's video on the topic or the H3H3 videos about their Fair Use lawsuit, which I have linked in the description, and I definitely recommend watching.
Those early controversies surrounding react content were solved using Fair Use, which is the US legislation that "promotes freedom of expression by permitting the unlicensed use of copyright-protected works in certain circumstances" like education, and, in the case of react content, "transformative uses" that "add something new...and do not substitute for the original use of the work."
But what I want to talk about today actually has nothing to do with Fair Use. Because lately, there has been a different controversy that's popped up, that's less about what's strictly legal or illegal, and more about what's fair to other content creators.
There's this new genre of react content, where livestreamers will "react" to YouTube videos, and often what this amounts to is the streamer watching entire videos on stream. And, legally, what they're doing may or may not fall under Fair Use. Often it is Fair Use, but, again, that's not what this video is about.
This video is about what Australian GTA V streamer DarkViperAU refers to as "content theft." And if you want to watch his series of videos breaking down the ethics of this kind of react content, then I have that linked in the description, and I recommend checking it out. 
Now, I personally think "theft" might be a strong word, but, DarkViper raises a lot of good points about these "react" practices and he illustrates how react streamers often absorb views that could have gone to content's original creators. Essentially, DarkViper argues that streamers are taking all the hard work that creators put into their videos, reaping all the rewards (all the views), and depriving the creators from getting those benefits themselves. Because when you watch someone's video on someone else's stream, what incentive do you have to watch that video when it comes across your YouTube Home Feed later? 
Now, I'm not here to weigh in on the actual data or prevalence of this. I generally agree with DarkViper here, but this video isn't about taking sides in the "is reacting `content theft'?" debate. For the purposes of this video, the issue isn't whether reacting is content theft. The issue...is that those reactors say that their reactions are good for creators...because they're giving them a boost when they watch their content on stream.
Streamers are defending themselves against DarkViper's position that they're taking views, by arguing that, no, they're giving these creators a platform. In the words of Hasan, they're getting a "fat bump" in views. But the fact is that this isn't happening. They say they're essentially paying these creators in exposure, but this "exposure" is minor at best, and is usually just negligible.
So this is the problem. The problem is not with reactors themselves, the problem is not with Fair Use, and the problem is not with the drama that's spawned from these discussions. The problem is that streamers say that what they're doing is good for creators, but it clearly isn't.
But what if that could change? What if they could react and have the creators actually get a "fat bump" from those reactions? 
Well, that was the question that my husband - Mr. Bee - and I asked ourselves last month when we were sitting in our backyard one evening. And what we came up with - well, what he came up with - was the idea that maybe there was way to have all the stream viewers' "views" - the eyeballs that The Algorithm turns into numbers - go both to the streamer, and to the original content creator.
I thought it was a great idea, and...I have a platform, so I figured, "y'know what? why not? let's try it and see how it goes!" This is that experiment...
The Experiment
Overview
[maybe just use clip from the livestream where I go through this?]
The Videos
We watched three videos, each from a differently sized creator: one of them was chosen by me and the other two were chosen by my husband. For the experiment we went from smallest channel to largest, which meant we started with Kiana Lanae.
I hadn't heard of her, which isn't surprising because her channel is very young, and she'd only just put out her first video, which is the one I reacted to. My husband found her through this Reddit thread where small creators can share their work and help boost each other - it's really wholesome and nice, and I'm so glad my husband found her, because...   [insert Reddit screen caps?]
Let me just take a second and gush about this creator.  Her content... Is so fucking good. Her production quality is through the roof and her content is really thoughtful and well-done and interesting and sweet and just...nice. Kiana - if you're watching this - I wish you all the joy in the world. You are a gem.
Anyway, her content is really stellar - and, honestly, go subscribe to her - and I know it would have done well eventually, but I was more than happy to feature one of her videos - her only video, at the time - on the stream.
And after Kiana was John the Duncan - JD - and this was the video that I chose. JD is a great mid-tier creator at around 22 thousand subs, and his most recent video at the time was about education, which I've talked about extensively on my channel, so I figured it would be a good fit for my audience. And, again, JD is really wonderful, and you should go subscribe to him, too. 
And then after that was a video from Joel Haver, a huge creator who makes animated and live-action skits. He has a million and a half subscribers, so it was probably a pretty safe bet that people would enjoy watching one of his videos on stream.
The Experiment
So those were the videos. Now let's see how it went:
[maybe just show clips, snippets/examples of how it went]
The Outcomes
Results
So...what did I actually learn from this experiment?
Well, let's circle back to my hypothesis: I hypothesized that this Rising Tide Method would do more to "boost" the creators whose content was shown on stream than the "Exposure Method" did. Now, this seemed pretty obvious during the stream, when I refreshed the videos after having watched them with my audience, and the view count and subscriber count immediately shot up. 
[insert clip from stream of me refreshing and reacting to the view/sub counts]
But I also think it's important to look at the data a little more closely, and also to look at the long-term effects. So I reached out to both JD and Kiana, and they both shared some of their analytics with me, and what I learned... didn't really surprise me, to be honest. [show images on screen]
What these analytics show is that there was a boost during the stream - which... yeah. that was kind of the whole point of the stream - but what's most interesting is watching what happens after. For Kiana, her data shows that after this sizable boost during the stream...she got other boosts when her other videos came out.
Now, of course they weren't as big as this boost, because there weren't hundreds of people watching all at the same time - but. These little boosts mean that The Algorithm got ahold of the video. It means that this big peak that she got from the stream helped to convince YouTube that her videos were worth promoting.
And you can see a similar thing in JD's analytics. His views and view time peaked during the stream, and then went back to their normal trajectory. The slope normalized within a couple days. But what's interesting is the subscriber count: There was a peak - as we'd expect - and then it slowed down. But...the slope wasn't exactly the same. The subscribers increased at a slightly faster rate. It's not certain that this was due to the stream, but it's at least a correlation and shouldn't be ignored when we're looking at data.
Now, something else that is definitely worth talking about is user experience. As a creator, it was a little frustrating to get everything set up in a way that worked consistently. But I'm also not a full-time react streamer, so maybe with a little more practice and experience it'd be easier for me?
The experience for viewers was...a whole can of worms. But luckily I have some data for that, too. [insert graph from poll]
[insert clip of me going over the poll data?]
So there are a lot of issues. That's definitely true. But that doesn't mean we should throw the baby out with the bathwater. So let's take a look at what we can do about these issues.
Next Steps
Clearly this method is effective, but it still needs some work before it will be widely accepted. 
[include clips of me going through the "what to do about it" bit at the end?]
Since doing the livestream, I've reached out to my contact at YouTube, and she said it sounded really interesting, and said if I sent her some of the information that she could pass it along to the right people. Now, I don't know if that'll actually come to anything, but...only time will tell. But if you know anyone at YouTube, or if you just want to tweet at them or something, then it might be worthwhile to put this idea in more people's heads.
I'm also working with a few folks who reached out to me with some serious suggestions about how to make some kind of plugin or extension or app that could help streamline the streaming process. I'm not sure how this 3rd party program will actually shake out, but I do know that several people are at least tinkering with something that could end up working, and which I could possibly experiment with in the future.
Something else that I mentioned in the stream was something you can do - you can reach out to your favorite content creators and react streamers and suggest that they try this. I think it would be really helpful to have more information and data to work from, especially from streamers who have larger audiences than I do. Don't hound anyone, of course, but I think the only way we can verify that this is actually helpful for creators is if we have a larger sample size.
Other than that...let me know in the comments if you have any suggestions for how we can solve this problem. But just make sure that your suggestion actually solves the problem. A solution needs to provide views (like, Algorithmically) to both the streamer and the creator, it needs to be as simple as possible, especially for viewers, needs to be usable on all YouTube viewing platforms. So if you're going to suggest that I just use a window-in-window setup or a Chrome extension like Watch Party, take a second and ask yourself if what you're about to suggest fits these 3 criteria first.
But anyway, I think one of the beautiful things about this particular problem is that it's relatively neutral as far as the "react content" drama goes. Even if you think reactors are the greatest form of entertainment on the internet, you can still acknowledge that more could be done to help the people whose work they're reacting to. And like I mentioned during the stream, this "Rising Tide" solution wouldn't hurt the streamer in any way - they would still get the views from their viewers. They would just also be helping provide views to the original content creators. 
Conclusion
Ultimately, this isn't a final product...but it has promise. I think there is something worthwhile here. Obviously it's not perfect, but I didn't set out trying to make something perfect. I set out trying to make something better than what we currently have. And I think we accomplished that. I, with the help of my audience of a few hundred, was able to give a pretty sizable boost to an undiscovered channel and a not-insubstantial boost to a mid-tier channel. 
Imagine the boost that someone could give if they had an audience in the tens of thousands, like a lot of these reactors have. What I did isn't going to change the world. But it did offer a slight change to the trajectories of these smaller channels that I reacted to. And that's something. It's certainly more than the "fat bump" that Hasan gives to the creators whose work he watches on his stream.
So, I'm not sure where to go from here. I've done pretty much everything I have the power to do, which is why I'm making this video. It's up to you all now. I did the experiment, I put the idea into the world...now it's up to all of you whether we work toward a more equitable future. It will be harder, there will be growing pains, but on the other side, we can fundamentally change the content creation landscape for the better. The Rising Tide Method is just one lonely creator's attempt at forging a path toward a future where creators get the credit they deserve.
Are you coming with me?
Outro/Poem
Thanks so much for sticking around to the end of the video! Keep an eye out for the next video in the series, where I'll be tackling whether YouTube success is based on luck, or on skill, or on...something else entirely. So be sure to subscribe to the channel and ring the bell so you know when that comes out!
This video wouldn't have been possible without my wonderful patrons and channel members, whose names you can see scrolling here, and I want to give a special shout-out to A Tasty Snack, Adam, Andrew, Dylan, Justin Lowery, Robert Bradford, Science Punk Sellout, and Will Swanson. Thank you all so very, very much.
If you'd like to join them in the credits and get some cool perks like early access to videos, joining our patron-only discord server, or having a custom-written poem just for you, then go ahead and join me on Patreon, which I have linked in the description.
And finally, we have our Patron Poem of the video. For Prudent Penguin, here is "Pine Bones:"

"Pine Bones"

They were too small to be deer,
the bones we found under the cedar tree.

They were big-around as my pinky
and sticky with gristle too stubborn to fall off.

A bit of moss had begun to grow up around the pile
and held on when I tried to pick them up.

The earth was pleading with me:
Let them lie. Leave them be.

I brought the little bones home,
gently scrubbed, then dried in the sun,

and stored them on the windowsill 
in green sea-glass bottles

that made the sunlight dance 
like wind-caught spring leaves on the floor.

Realism is Bad, Actually
(Voice Only) Sponsorship Disclosure
"This video is sponsored by Wren, a site you can use to help take action in the fight against climate change. More on that later in the video."
Intro: Concrete Monsters
I want you to make up a monster. Just create a monster in your brain. And once you have a good image of your monster, I want you to imagine what it sounds like. Now...how did you do that? How did you figure out what this imaginary creature sounded like?
This is what film sound designers do every day. Sound designers are given scenes, some of which include creatures or technology that don't exist, and told to make sounds for them. Sometimes they're given direction, like "I want this monster to sound like a...train?" but then they still have to actually figure out how to make that a reality.
So...how do you make something entirely fictional...sound believable? Let's take a look at one  particular scene from the first Lord of the Rings film, The Fellowship of the Ring. In this scene, the Fellowship are escaping the Mines of Moria, and just as they reach the final stretch, they get attacked by a Balrog.
Now, this Balrog is...basically like a fallen angel that became a demon and sided with the bad  jj guys in a war like five thousand years ago, and then got its ass kicked, and so it ran away and hid under a under a mountain and fell asleep for a few thousand more years, and then some dwarves moved in and ended up waking it up, and it got real grumpy. All that to say.... This is a very fictional creature. But in the film, it sounds... well...
Somehow, sound designer David Farmer made the Balrog sound not just terrifying, but somehow...right. I have no idea what a Balrog sounds like - I mean...probably no one does except J.R.R. Tolkein in his heart of hearts - but in Fellowship, it really feels like that's what a Balrog should sound like. Those sound effects are so intuitive, so raw, so alien and yet so natural - they are what makes the Balrog feel real.
Farmer designed the Balrog noises using cinder blocks and wood, and tweaked them a little to sound just right. And sure, that works for a fictional sound, but what about if you were doing the sound effects for a movie that wasn't about magic and elves and ancient, unknowable evils? Enter foley artists - the people who make sound effects for the ambient background stuff that happens in films, like footsteps or rustling papers. 
To make sound effects, foley artists sometimes use props that would actually be involved in whatever activity they're recording the sound of. Like, to record footsteps, they often actually use shoes on whatever particular material the people in the scene are walking on. But a lot of the time, foley artists use things other than the thing on screen to make the sounds of the thing on screen. Like how horse galloping on stone is done using coconuts - like, really, that's actually what professional foley artists use. It's not a joke. 
And what's even wilder is that almost 100% of the time, those "inaccurate" foley sounds actually sound...better. To audiences, those coconuts sound better than actual horse hooves. But...why? Well, I want to put a pin in that, because in this video, I want to look at how we as consumers of media decide whether things sound, look, or feel "realistic," and also how much we value realism. 
Because, more often than not, people say they want their media to be realistic. But this is such a widely held belief that I think it's worth looking into to make sure this belief is actually worth believing in. So, today I'd like to investigate this idea of realism and question whether it's really all it's cracked up to be. Let's get to it, shall we?
Part 1: Using Realism
People like realism. Now, a real quick disclaimer: When I talk about realism in this video, I'm not talking about capital-R Realism, like the literary or artistic movements. I'm talking about the thing most people mean when they say something is "realistic."
But, in any case, people like realism. I don't think this is some outlandish statement that really needs a lot of support or research or whatever, because it feels like everywhere you go online you see arguments for "more realistic" movies, tv shows, video games, and even books. And if you do want some hard numbers, I ran a poll over on my YouTube Community page, and 77% of respondents said yes or "yeah, kind of" - it was a small minority of people who gave an outright "no, I do not like realism".
People want things to be "realistic," but what I want to do today is examine this. I want to tear it apart and look at its bones and figure out what realism is, what it is not, why people like it so much, and whether it's really all that great. So the first thing we need to do is figure out what it is. When we say we like when things are "realistic"....what are we talking about?
And this is actually where we run into our first roadblock. Because people can't really agree on what counts as "realistic". In fact, I have some data to back up just how confusing it is! To the whiteboard!
So, like I mentioned earlier, I did a poll over on my Community tab, where I asked all of you to talk about what you mean when you refer to something as "realistic", and so I have some numbers to support the fact that you have a preference for realism. But I also read through all the comments on that poll where you all talked about what you actually mean when you say you like or dislike "realism" and I read all the comments on a different post I made where I asked you how you defined "realism".
This was...hundreds of comments. And I read all of them and organized them and coded the data and color-coded them and... [look kind of away from the camera] is - is it obvious that I miss grad school? Please let me do research again.
Anyway, so I had all these comments from all of you, and when I organized and analyzed them, I found a few trends. So...what do you all think makes media "realistic"? The #1 answer I saw was about characters  -  you think things are realistic when the characters act like real people. When their lives mirror yours, or they respond to situations in ways that most real life humans would respond to things. Complex characters and good dialogue are "realistic."
The next most common topic was the internal logic of stories. Stories are realistic when they follow their own rules. Stuff doesn't necessarily have to follow the rules of our universe  -  like there can be obviously fictional elements like magic or lightspeed travel or affordable housing  -  and as long as the rules for those things stay consistent within the story, then it's fine. Internal logic is "realistic."
Another couple of common comments had to do with the emotional element  -  things felt realistic when you could really connect to the stories or the characters  -  as well as with grittiness. Though what's interesting is that lots of you said other people thought  "realistic" equals "dark and gritty"  -  so this is something that's a commonly held belief  -  but that you, yourselves, didn't agree with it. So this is a common thing, but most of you don't like it. Anyway, strong emotions (but not melodrama) and grittiness are "realistic."
A lot of you also suggested that "realistic" often refers to things that look realistic (though this was usually only applied to video games, not necessarily TV and movies, and obviously this doesn't work with books). So "things that look like real life" are "realistic."
Surprisingly, one of the less common ones was the actual factual, objective reality definition, where things are realistic if they get all the facts right or are perfectly historically accurate. This was surprising, because I think this is one of the simpler and more common definitions you see on the internet  -  you know the stereotypical history nerds who get mad when things aren't 100% accurate to how they actually happened. So historical/scientific accuracy is "realistic."
And then there were a couple that only a few of you suggested, but that I liked a lot so I'm bringing them in as honorable mentions. A few of you said you found realism in the little details of stories. If the little intricacies of real life are present in your characters' lives, then your story is realistic.
And finally, a few of you talked about how you found stories realistic when they felt like stories. If you could get immersed in them and could forget about the writer, and the universe of the story became your universe, and there was nothing to distract you from the act of consuming a piece of media, that is when it felt realistic.
Now, all of these are great answers for what makes something realistic. But they're...kind of all over the place. But don't worry  -  this isn't a problem with you all. I'm not throwing you folks under the bus, because even actual scholars don't really know how to distill "realism" down into one specific type of thing. But we'll get to that later on in the video.
So when we lay it all out like this, we can see that "realism" is a mess. It's this huge amalgamation made of all these different parts and no one really has a good idea of what it actually means. Well, if we agree that realism can be any of these things, then the next step is to figure out whether these things are actually accurate. For instance, are "quote un-quote realistic" characters...actually realistic? Let's find out.
Part 2: Investigating Realism
Bad Because it's Inaccurate
Okay, so we know what realism is  -  or at least we know what we kind of think it is, even if we don't have a super clear answer  -  but now we need to ask: Is this actually what reality is? In other words, are these "realistic" things actually realistic? The dictionary defines realistic as "representing familiar things in a way that is accurate or true to life," so let's go through this list and look at each of these examples and see how they match up with reality. 
The most obvious one here is "realistic" graphics. Now, obviously our graphics still have a little ways to go before they're entirely realistic. The newest Unreal game engine looks really good, but there's more to "realism" than just hair physics. A lot of human models struggle with realism because it's real frickin' hard to get the little minute facial movements right, and when you get them wrong...that's when we run into the uncanny valley. So, we're close. But not quite there.
And if we look at this from the angle of, say, advertising... We've all seen those viral pictures comparing what the commercial looked like to what the reality is. We can make things look good, but not necessarily realistic. 
One of the most common things that gets brought up in discussions of realism  -  and the thing that actually inspired this entire video  -  is dialogue. People love to talk about the dialogue of characters in Quentin Tarantino films, and I just want to say: That is not how humans talk. It's cool, it's fun, it's engaging, it's interesting, but it's not realistic. No humans talk like this.
And sure, Tarantino's dialogue isn't necessarily advertising itself as "realistic," but there are some movies and books where characters do talk "like real people," - with all the ums and uhs and lack of precision - and sometimes that's a solid artistic choice, but a lot of the time...it's just annoying. It's clunky and distracting and just isn't great to listen to. 
If you actually listen to how real humans talk, we talk...like garbage. We're not precise, we're not meaningful, we're not concise, we stumble over our words and use the wrong words and people mishear things and we have a bunch of filler words - basically, we suck at talking. But dialogue in movies and books, and even video games, serves a purpose - so it doesn't sound like the purposeless talking that most humans do. It's not "realistic".
We also say that we like "realistic characters"  -  we like when characters look like us and act like us and make mistakes like us. ...but do we really? Most of our fiction follows characters that don't actually act like human beings. Our fiction follows heroes and chosen ones and people who have the perfect skillsets to solve the problems they're faced with, and people who are orphans or are broken. And I'm not saying that's bad  -  we'll get that later  -  I'm just saying these characters aren't exactly the average person.
If our characters were realistic, they'd be boring as fuck. There's a reason most of our fiction isn't about just regular, normal people. Our fiction is about extraordinary people, or about normal people in extraordinary circumstances. Or it's about normal people in normal situations as viewed through an extraordinary lens. In any case, it's not "realistic."
We say we like things to be historically or factually accurate, but that's also limiting. If we're stuck trying to make things exactly like they happened in real life, it often isn't a very engaging story. Because real life isn't a story. Real life doesn't have clear heroes and villains and character arcs and plot arcs. Real life doesn't follow a three-act structure. Our histories don't fit neatly into the hero's journey.
War movies or games often create fictional characters who weren't actually real humans in the real war, and biopics often dramatize events to make the story more engaging. And even "realistic" science fiction has to bend the laws of physics to make things work. Like, in Arrival, which is one of my favorite films, the whole plot is based on the real-life Sapir - Whorf hypothesis...taken to an absurdly extreme degree. If the film had been scientifically accurate...we wouldn't have a story.
In this same vein, can you imagine if video games were realistic? A lot of games  -  especially things like the Assassin's Creed series  -  market themselves as being historically and geographically realistic. Now, obviously they're not perfectly realistic  -  I don't think Leonardo da Vinci was best friends with time-travelling assassins  -  but can you imagine how bad these games would be if they used realistic gravity?
So much of the appeal of the Assassin's Creed games are in the way the character climbs huge buildings and then leaps down from them, landing unharmed in a wagon of hay. If this were realistic... It would be bad. You'd fall quickly, painfully, and splat onto the ground. And that's not very cool. And in these games, you want to feel cool. Time-travelling assassins are objectively cool.
All of this is to say that "realism" and "realistic"  -  the way we use them  -  are often inaccurate. The things we call "realistic" often are not. "But Zoe!" you might be asking, "So what if the way we use "realism" isn't accurate? The definition has just shifted and now means something different than what it used to!" 
And to that I say... Okay, but  -  couple of things  -  I may be a descriptivist, but I also think that precision in language is important, and if you say you want things to be "realistic," you should actually mean you want things to be realistic. But that's nearly impossible when our definitions are super muddled. 
None of us knows what anyone else means when they say they want things to be realistic. Sometimes we have some general ideas, but for the most part, there's so much disparity between our definitions that it makes the word pretty much meaningless for any sort of shared media analysis communication. And also, when you use a term that isn't accurate, it can actually hide some of its more insidious elements. But we'll get to that.
Part 3: Criticizing Realism
Now that we've seen how "realism" as a term is inaccurate, it would be easy to just finish there, pack up and head home, boys, job's done, good work, we'll go again tomorrow. But I don't want to do that. Because while I do think the word "realism" is inaccurate, I think it would be premature to suggest that it's just the word that is the problem.
No, I think we should also interrogate the concept of realism. We can agree that it's bad to label things "realistic" when they aren't, but should we even be trying to make things realistic in the first place? Now, before you type an angry comment, I'm not going to be arguing that we should never strive for verisimilitude or anything like that - I just want to stop and take a genuine look at an ideal that we sort of take for granted.
It's just kind of assumed that we want things to be realistic. That "realism" is an ideal. But I think we should question that assumption. So let's do that.
Bad Because it Can be Dangerous 
(Should I be on the couch? Can you take me seriously when I'm not in a lab coat? Do I need to start wearing a lab coat in every video?) Alright, so let's put "realism" on the stand and look at all the ways the entire concept of making things like reality could be bad. Let's begin with the CSI Effect. The CSI Effect is a phenomenon that happens when jurors watch too much CSI - or other crime-related drama - and expect the courtroom to function the same way they see on TV.
They expect there to be lots of scientific evidence, and they expect all the scientific evidence to be sound and solid and perfect. But that's not how most cases are. And the CSI Effect occurs when this difference between expectation and reality affects how the jurors act.
And the CSI Effect is just one answer to the question: "What happens when people actually expect these pieces of media to be accurate - or semi-accurate - representations of reality?" It's been well-documented that the media we consume shapes the way we view the world, and that's especially true when our media is realistic or is presented as representative of reality.
Just like watching a lot of CSI caused viewers to have skewed ideas of how much scientific evidence to expect and the weight of that scientific evidence, so too can other "realistic" media give us skewed ideas of...anything, really.
Now, there's not a ton of evidence that the CSI Effect exists to the degree that the media made it out to be - the study I found that examined the phenomenon found watching crime-scene drama shows didn't affect how jurors made their verdicts, but it did still cause them to expect more scientific evidence during trials. So...they were affected, but, theoretically, according to this one study, that didn't actually change the outcomes of the trials.
But this kind of thing can happen with any of the media we consume. For instance, there was another study I read, about how Black characters in TV shows affected how viewers thought of Black people, generally, in real life. And the "results revealed that television viewers perceive the occupational roles and personality characteristics that African Americans portray on television as real or true to life. On the other hand, viewers did not perceive the low-achieving status roles and positive stereotypes of African Americans on television as real or accurate portrayals."
In other words, the participants - 85% of whom were white, in this study - thought that most of what they saw about Black characters was true to the reality of actual Black people in real life. Except for the good stuff - the "positive stereotypes". That wasn't accurate, of course. When media is presented as "realistic" people take it to be actually representative of reality. And that can perpetuate a lot of really bad shit.
And the same can happen in games. One paper studied this phenomenon in the character attribute system in FIFA. In this system, players could help determine the scores of the physical and mental attributes of each character - each representing a real-life athlete. There were 29 total attributes, some of which were physical, like Strength, Speed, and Agility, and some of which were mental, like Composure and Vision (which the devs have stated is the game's version of an "intelligence" score). 
Basically, think of these like the ability scores of D&D characters. But just if there were 29 instead of six. (I'm just sort of assuming that if you're watching my channel, you are more familiar with TTRPGs than you are with sports games.)
In the "FIFA Ultimate Team" game mode, the characters' scores were based on input from players - basically, players could decide which character was stronger or faster or more composed or more intelligent. But when the authors of the study analyzed the statistics of the characters, the way each character's attributes had been scored revealed some clear racial biases.
White characters were often scored with higher mental stats, but lower physical stats. And characters who were Black or Hispanic/Latino had disproportionately lower mental stats and higher physical stats. The authors didn't speculate whether this was intentional or not, but it goes to show that the veneer of "realism" that is present in the statistics of a realistic, complex sports game like FIFA, can cover up the more insidious elements of racism that can seep through.
Because the game is realistic, when racism is able to be coded into it and platformed on it, that racism is seen as "realistic" too. And this can be seen in things like sexism, too. I'm not going to go into it here, because it's been talked about to death and I'm sure you're all aware of it, but the character models for women in video games... They aren't what I'd call "what actual human women look like."
But because women in games often don't look like real human women, even in games with more realistic graphics, players often have skewed ideas of what women actually look like. And this can be seen in the recent viral tweet where someone was complaining about the character art for Aloy, the main character from Horizon: Zero Dawn.
This promotional shot for the sequel, Horizon: Forbidden West, featured a close-up shot of Aloy's face, and this included showing the little peach fuzz hairs on her cheeks. Now, the user's blatant transphobia aside, what this tweet tells us is that this person doesn't know what women look like - and also just isn't aware that, as mammals, we are literally all covered in hair all over our bodies. .
But it also tells us that there are a lot of people who have such a skewed idea of what women look like, that even when something objectively realistic like hair is shown on women, people don't think it's actually realistic, because they are so used to the women they see in games or on magazines or in animated films and TV shows. The art and beauty industries have convinced the world that women look...not how any women actually look.
All of that is to say that all kinds of negative garbage can be reinforced and made to seem representative of reality when it's presented in realistic media. So we need to be careful about what is seen as "realistic" and be aware of how that "realism" can skew our perceptions.

Bad Because it's an Excuse for Bigotry
In a similar vein, realism can be dangerous because of how it can be weaponized. Remember when Battlefield V came out, and the trailer and all the promotional art had the audacity to feature a woman? And we all know how women were never involved in the war effort in any capacity and also never fought on the frontlines? Except that they did, even in WWII.
But a lot of fans of the series criticized this fifth entry because it featured a woman, and this woman had prosthetics that didn't exist at the time period - she had a fully mechanical arm - and also another character had a katana? Anyway, fans were livid. Because this wasn't "realistic."
No matter that most war games have anachronistic weapons and allow you to pull off unrealistic combos (like how in other Battlefield games, if you're in a dogfight with another fighter plane, you can jump out of your plane, take out a rocket-launcher mid-air, shoot the guy in the plane behind you, and then fall back into your plane and resume flying it. Y'know...just like they do in real life.)
So you have to ask: When fans of these games are upset with women with mechanical arms, are they actually upset by a lack of "realism"? Or is it something else? Now, I'm not saying all gamers are misogynists or anything - I don't believe that's true at all. But I think that it would be naive to think that there aren't some underlying biases and blind spots that gamers have when they decide what to be mad about.
Another example of this kind of thing is the recent backlash against the new Lord of the Rings "Rings of Power" show on Amazon Prime. The trailer for the show featured lots of really cool characters, including a black dwarf woman. Lots of fans were upset, saying not only should this character have a beard - since, canonically, dwarven women look the same as dwarven men - but also, apparently, Tolkein never intended for dwarves to be black.
But just like with the Battlefield example, we need to ask: Are these fans actually mad about the apparent "inconsistencies" with the lore? Remember, one of the most important kinds of "realism" that you all talked about on my Community posts was the idea that stories have to have internal consistency. They have to abide by the laws of their own universes.
On one hand, those things could be reasoned out in the "lore" - there's no reason some of the dwarves couldn't have been black. There could be a perfectly acceptable in-universe explanation. On the other hand, it's worth considering if fans aren't actually mad because of those historical inaccuracies. It's possible that they could be mad because it doesn't feel real within the Lord of the Rings universe. 
They want something that abides by the laws of the universe that they're used to. They want things to remain consistent - they see anything that breaks consistency as "unrealistic" and bad. And what's consistent in Lord of the Rings is...whiteness. To these fans, it's not about objective realism - ie, what could be considered "realistic" in our universe - it's about what feels realistic for the universe of Lord of the Rings. And Lord of the Rings was built in a hegemonically straight, white, able-bodied male universe.
And, to be clear, I'm not saying that's a good thing. I'm saying it's a bad thing, in fact. But I think it just helps shed light on the reasoning behind some of these beliefs. It explains them, but it does not excuse them.
And what's hard about this is that some people genuinely do care about accuracy - there are lots of fans who are glad to see more representation in Lord of the Rings, and genuinely do just wish the dwarf princess had a beard. But it would be naive to assume there aren't people who are just using that as an excuse (subconsciously, perhaps) to excuse their racism. And sometimes it's hard to tell who's who.
Our obsession with realism, paired with an inaccurate idea of what "realism" even is, means that we've given the perfect camouflage to bad actors who want to make racist and sexist arguments about various properties while hiding under the veneer of "just wanting their stories to be realistic."
Bad Because Reality Itself is Bad - The "Dark and Gritty" Argument
And finally, even if realism weren't confusing or used for sketchy purposes, it would also be bad because it normalizes some...bad stuff. When we were talking about the community post data earlier, I mentioned that a lot of you suggested that "grittiness" was often seen by others as being "realistic," but that most of you didn't really like that or agree with it.
But this "dark and gritty" position, as you rightly pointed out, is fairly common, so I do think it's worth talking about here. So why is it that people think grittiness is realistic? Well, According to everyone's favorite feral raccoon man, Slavoj Zizek, another reason that violence feels real is "because the universe in which we live is somehow a universe of dead conventions and artificiality, [so] the only authentic real experience must be some extremely violent, shattering experience." 
In other words, when everything else in our world feels fake, the only thing that feels real anymore is violence. And I think this has some merit, but isn't a perfect answer. We definitely feel like TV has gotten fake, and that's part of what caused the rise of emotional tell-all reality shows and gross-out shows like Fear Factor, because we were sick of the sanitized nature of media. But I don't think this gives us a totally complete picture.
One thing that's caused the rise in gritty media over the past couple decades can be found by looking at what grittiness is a response to. A lot of the fiction we grew up on, like Disney movies, are really peaceful, and any time there is violence, it mostly happens off-screen or is watered-down. And because of that, we often associate peacefulness with children and childhood. And so, as you grow up, you naturally want to move on from that and make things that are more adult. 
But this grittiness trend didn't really explode until the mid-2000's, which was right after some...very bad things. Events like 9/11 and the ensuing war and the housing crash and the great recession showed us that life is hard and unfair and painful and dangerous and dark and...gritty. Artists wanted to reflect on these events as a way to process them, and audiences were really receptive to them because they helped us work through a lot of that pain that we felt.
Gritty art felt more real to us because we knew what it was like to experience those kinds of tragedies, and it was cathartic to see superheroes overcome that tragedy and enact justice - or, you could argue, revenge - and bring some semblance of balance back to the world. And this is why we ended up getting things like Christopher Nolan's Batman trilogy and the...iffy adaptation of Watchmen.
But what about gritty heroes, specifically? Well, David Goyer, the screenwriter of the Christopher Nolan Batman films, said that what he likes about Batman "[Batman] is the most realistic of the super heroes. There is a grittiness and grimness to him . . . in the pantheon of DC Comics heroes, Batman is the only one who's really conflicted. Green Lantern isn't tortured or tormented, and nor is the Flash. But Batman is. Conflicted heroes are more interesting to watch because they're more human  -  we can relate to them."
But scholar Will Brooker, in his book Hunting the Dark Knight, argues that this view of Batman - this idea that grittiness and grimness and conflict and torture and torment are "realistic" - is actually built on a very specific view of masculinity: "in the context of the Batman films, realism took on the meaning of an angry, violent masculinity and [often] an emphasis on technology." And we can see this everywhere, from Batman to Geralt of Rivia to Ethan Hunt to literally any of the men in Game of Thrones.
And this masculinity even affects women in these kinds of properties. And I want to give a content warning for the topics listed here - if you don't want to hear me talk about these, then go ahead and skip to the timestamp shown on screen.
The way this masculinity affects women often manifests as physical violence, especially sexual assault. Shows like Game of Thrones and Westworld are seen as showing the "gritty realism" of the darkness of real life by featuring physical and sexual violence directed toward women. In our current media landscape, fiction gets "gritty realism" points for explicitly showing harm coming to women. 
This can be seen in comics, too. The Killing Joke - a 1988 Batman graphic novel that was adapted into a film in 2016 - features this exact kind of thing. Joker - the main character of the graphic novel - at one point shoots Barbara Gordon, paralyzing her, strips her, and photographs her writing in pain, naked, on the floor.
But this gritty story isn't about Barbara Gordon. It's about Joker and Barbara's father James and Batman. So this awful, terrible, traumatic experience is used as fuel to further torment the men of the story, when Joker shares the photographs of Barbara with her father to torture him. Grittiness, for men, is a pain and conflict that makes them stronger. Grittiness, for women, is physical violence, exploitation, and loss of agency. But let's move on. 
Another angle of the grittiness argument is how it highlights and sanitizes the military. As Ben Pardy argues in his paper "Selling Marvel's Superheroes," "The notion of "realism" [in superhero films] is absurd as there is nothing realistic or grounded about superheroes battling back alien invasions led by a figure from Norse mythology." 
So, in these movies, the "near unquestioned presence of the military" acts as a "signifier of realism and quality to the American audience." In other words, grittiness - ultra violence and the ubiquitous presence of the military - is what makes these films feel "realistic." But this actually connects to the previous issue I brought up of how things that appear "realistic" can give us flawed views of reality. When these games and films are seen as "realistic," they sort of glamorize war. 
As scholar Lori Crowe suggests in the book The Militarization of Childhood: 
      "the trend toward increasingly realistic portrayals of military technology situations is problematic.The blurring of any distinction between reality and fantasy functions to filter war, [and] the filtering leaves only "clean war," glamorous fighting sequences, the superiority of technology, an insurmountable power over one's enemies. Realistic battle sequences and weaponry operate in the absence of any real consequences: there is rarely any blood in superhero movies, and the superhero (almost) never dies. War is exciting, battle is exhilarating, and the very real cost of military service and military violence is obscured. It is impossible to ignore the possibility that these representations are contributing to the popular acceptance and celebration of advanced war-fighting capabilities of the United States and educating children toward this very inclination."
Crowe goes on to point out how this kind of filtering actually helps to hide the systemic issues that lead to war. In media like this that sanitizes war, huge stuff is solved by individuals. Powerful, super individuals, but still just individuals. The problems are massive, but they can only be solved by strong, courageous single people. 
This trend of individuals solving big, existential, society-wide problems actually has a name: It's the American Monomyth, which its creators Robert Jewett and John Shelton Lawrence have identified this structure "A community in a harmonious paradise is threatened by evil; normal institutions fail to contend with this threat; a selfless superhero emerges to renounce temptations and carry out the redemptive task; aided by fate, his decisive victory restores the community to its paradisiacal condition; the superhero then recedes into obscurity."
Doesn't this sound like basically every superhero movie ever? This trend in American pop culture of enigmatic individual heroes swooping in and solving systemic issues and then disappearing back into the ether, is a massive and massively interesting concept. 
And it relates directly to this same issue of the sanitization of the military. Like Crowe says in her article, "Hollywood loves heroes, and the military has more of them than anyone else. Heroes are both exciting and traditionally patriotic -- the perfect figure to advertise the military." And that's to say nothing of how the military bankrolls movies, but only if those movies show the military in a positive light.
But that's a whole other thing. I've wanted to talk about superhero movies and the American monomyth for a while now, but it's way too big to cover in this video, so let me know if this is something you'd be interested in, and I might cover it in its own video later this summer.
Anyway, all of that is to say that grittiness is just...bad. There are ways to process tragedy, and there are ways to express violence and fun, bloody gore, but if the world is already this dark...why would we want to bring that darkness into all of our art?. Like Patrick Willems says in his R-Rated superhero video, we can let our fiction be silly, be fun, be light, and still have it be worth reading and watching. There is more to the real world than violence. 
Ad Read
As we've seen, reality isn't always a great ideal. And part of that comes from the fact that reality is often dark and scary and frustrating. One of the things that causes a lot of these feelings is the looming specter of climate change. For me, the climate crisis is really overwhelming to think about, and I want to help, but it's like...where do I even start? Today's sponsor Wren makes it super simple. 
Wren is a website where you can calculate your carbon footprint, then offset it by funding various carbon reduction projects. After you answer a few questions about your lifestyle Wren calculates your carbon footprint, and then gives you a few suggestions for how you can reduce it. But no one can reduce their carbon footprint to zero, so to offset what's left you can sign up to make a monthly contribution of any size to various carbon reduction projects.
Once you've set up your contributions, you'll get monthly updates on the projects you support. And these projects aren't just abstract science...things - they have some that directly help actual human beings, like this project that helps provide clean cooking fuel to refugees in Uganda. Your money is directly helping the wellbeing of actual human people, and I think that's just awesome.
One of my favorite things about Wren is how transparent they are. They make it super clear exactly where your money is going, and they even give a breakdown of all their costs and fees, and even share how much their CEO makes (which is actually the same as the median employee salary. So that's cool.)
Anyway, if you'd like to calculate your carbon footprint and also help fund some really awesome carbon reduction projects, then go ahead and click the link at the top of the description and in the pinned comment, to take those first steps in the fight against climate change. And the first 100 people who sign up will get an extra 10 trees planted in their name! Ten whole, real-life trees!
I've talked before about how I can afford to be really picky about who I accept as sponsors, thanks to all my wonderful supporters over on Patreon. So I only work with companies who I genuinely believe in, and the folks over at Wren are doing really incredible work that has done a lot of good in the world already. And by clicking that link, you're not just supporting me and my work, but you're also helping a group that I believe is actually helping make the world a better place. So be sure to check them out, and thanks again to Wren for sponsoring this video!
Part 4: Replacing Realism
So, clearly, "realism" isn't all it's cracked up to be. One could even say it's...bad, actually. It's inaccurate, it's dangerous, and it's just...bad. But that doesn't mean we should just throw "realism" in the trash and then go on living our lives without a word to describe all the stuff we're talking about when we use the word "realism."
In fact, I think it'd probably be worse if we just threw out this word and didn't replace it. So what I propose is figuring out what, exactly we enjoy about these "quasi-realistic" things  -  these things that we've called "realistic" but that I've now shown are not, actually realistic  -  and then once we figure out exactly what it is we enjoy and why we enjoy it, then we can figure out a better, more precise word with less baggage and ambiguity.
List out attributes
Okay, so if the stuff we like about our media isn't technically "realism," then...what is it?  Well, let's go back to the whiteboard and see what we've got.
To begin, let's just start with some synonyms and see where that gets us. So the thesaurus suggests authentic, faithful, lifelike, natural, original, representative, true, true to life, and truthful. But that's not useful at all, is it? Authentic to whom? Faithful to what? And are true, true to life, and truthful really 3 separate categories? I mean, probably, but it feels like a meaningless distinction in this case because apparently "realistic" is a synonym to all three. So that's not incredibly helpful, but it's a start.
But let's go ahead and bring in all these terms that we used as examples of realism and add them to the mix here. Now, while I think you all are wonderful and have great ideas, and these terms here will be helpful, I do want to do my due diligence and actually corroborate your answers with what the experts have to say. Let's do some research. 
[some kind of "6 weeks of research later" visual gag?  -  change clothes?]
Alright, turns out that there's a lot of research on the topic of realism. So, so very much research. "Realism" is a pretty big topic and a lot of people have talked about it and no one really has a great handle on it. And keep in mind I was just looking at realism in media - this isn't even getting into the entire corner of philosophy that focuses entirely on these questions.
There's a lot of competing definitions for realism, especially in film and game studies, because these areas of study are so young that there hasn't really been time to settle on an agreed-upon definition. But this doesn't mean they're useless. In fact, they're pretty helpful. Because what this tells us is that there's a lot of confusion and ambiguity when it comes to how we define "realism."
There are different definitions in literary studies and in film studies and in games studies, and so I looked at all of their definitions - or as many as I could get my hands on - and organized all the different terms they use, and then compared that data with the data that I got from the community posts, and here's what we got.
So... In literary theories, realism is about the ups and downs of human life (Aristotle), it's about having natural-sounding dialogue (LaPlante), and it's about being convincing and believable (Turchi, LaPlante). Literary theorist Peter Turchi compared "realism" to perspective in visual art, which suggests that what feels real is actually "distortion." In order to get those "realistic" feelings  -  in order to make things feel real and actually affect readers in real ways  -  you have to distort reality.
In film and other visual arts, realism is about trying to approximate the basic phenomenological qualities of the real world (Bazin), about being able to fool the audience into seeing things a certain way (Gurney, "trompe l'oeil") - like through perspective in visual art. Perspective, after all, is a purposeful distortion - you're drawing things not as they are, objectively, but how they are perceived, subjectively.
Others argue it's about showing ordinary, everyday people, about emotional vulnerability, about pseudo-intimacy (Biressi & Nunn) - all of which are most readily found in reality TV shows and even vlogs. And then we have Zizek's view that realism comes from violent, shattering experiences (Zizek), and also all the arguments for grittiness, grimness, conflict, anger, violence, and technology (Hunting the Dark Knight author?).
And in games studies, realism is about "reflecting critically on the minutia of everyday life" (Galloway), about things behaving or acting in a way that feels real (Juul, Frasca). And, of course, realism is also about every game studies scholar's least favorite word: the much-maligned concept of "immersion."
So yeah...there's a lot. Let's unpack all that, shall we? We can sort of group these various definitions into similar categories to the ones we grouped your definitions into. And I actually want to pull out one of these scholars in particular, because I think she offers us a really good framework that we can use going forward.
Alice Hall performed a study  -  a real study, not just an informal survey and a literature review like I'm doing  -  where she interviewed a few dozen people about how they defined realism in fiction, and then organized their answers into 6 different categories: plausibility, typicality, factuality, involvement, narrative consistency, and perceptual pervasiveness.
Plausibility is "could this thing happen?" (eg. Friends isn't "plausible" because, no, they could not afford that New York apartment). Typicality is "could this thing happen to me?" (eg. soap operas aren't realistic because they're about rich people who all have the wildest, most outlandish personal drama). Factuality is "did this actually happen?," and Involvement is about how much the audience can relate to or emotionally connect with the characters.
Narrative consistency is when stories follow their own rules, when they're internally consistent, don't contradict themselves, and "leave nothing jarringly unexplained"  -  this is the kind of "realism" that shows up most in sci-fi and fantasy. It might not be "plausible" or "factual," but within the laws of that story's universe...it works.
(And this is why people are allowed to complain about realism in sci-fi and fantasy. Because wanting stories to follow their own rules is a completely separate issue from the "plausibility" of the sci-fi or fantasy setting. So stop doing the whole "Oh, you want this thing in Star Wars to be "more realistic"?? Uh, it's a story about space wizards." thing. Stop it.)
And finally, perceptual pervasiveness is basically just good graphics. But I do actually want to bring in some lines from the paper, when she's giving direct quotes from the people she was interviewing, and they were talking about good graphics, and they say this:

I love it. Anyway, I think these 6 categories are really useful, and I've actually gone ahead and organized your responses and the scholarly research within these categories. Now, this chart doesn't really tell us anything new, but it does help us kind of visualize what's going on. 
We have these 6 categories, and most things fit neatly into them, but we also have a couple that felt like they lay outside this organization  -  like grittiness, and the little details, and what I'm calling the "narrative shield," which is basically that feeling that a story is just doing a really good job at being a story.
And there's another one I want to add, and that's experimentation. We like when things are realistic because it allows us a sort of lifelike sandbox in which we can experiment with different things that we might not be able to experience in real life. Like how Animal Crossing lets us live the dream of doing mundane tasks everyday, without pain or societal pressures.
And it can even apply to other media, like books and movies. I think "experimentation" also covers how we can feel immersed in stories, and often feel like we're experiencing things alongside the protagonist. Stories allow us to feel what it's like to be another person or explore fantastical worlds. Every time we read or watch fiction, we get to experiment with what it would be like to live another life.
Okay, so now that we have our complete list...what do we do with this? This is kind of a mess, right? But it's actually a good mess, because it means that no one really has an answer. Which is great, because it frees us from the responsibility of feeling like we have to have a good answer. So what we should do now is try to figure out why we actually like each of these categories. Because once we uncover the "why" we can tease out a new, better, more precise word. So let's go ahead and do that.
Use attributes to find new word(s)
Okay, so...what do we do with all of this? This is a lot, so let's try and simplify it a little bit. Plausibility and Typicality both cover the more traditional angles of realism  -  the question of "could this happen in real life? could this happen to me, in my real life?"  -  and can best be summed up with the idea of mirroring the experience of living in the world as we as individuals experience it. And this mirroring covers things like representation in media - we want to see ourselves in our art, we want to see people like us and our friends who experience things that we experience.
Before we move on, I want to give a little credit to Patrick Willems who did a video on realism in film, and the word he settled on to describe this was verisimilitude. ...but that word is hard to spell and honestly its definition feels a little squishy, so I'm electing to lump "verisimilitude" into this definition. It's nice, and it's fun to say, and it covers a specific kind of realism, but, alas, it's going to stay there for now.
Now, I would say the Perceptual Pervasiveness category can be combined with the Factuality category to be about mirroring the visual, scientific, and historical realities of the world. And you could even fit "grittiness" into this, or in the previous category, too. I think "grittiness" can just be broken up and scattered to the wind. Just a little grittiness in your definition, as a treat.
Okay, so if we take that personal connection of Typicality and merge it with the emotional connection of Involvement, and then throw in a dash of strong dialogue and complex characters, I think we can get something really interesting. All of these imply that we want our fiction to be really emotionally evocative, but without being over-the-top  -  remember, you all said you didn't like when characters were melodramatic, because it didn't feel realistic to have these huge emotions.
And the way I see it, my own personal view of emotionally evocative art, is that art becomes emotionally evocative when it strives to be an idealized version of reality. And we can see this in action when it comes to how food is advertised. These foods may not be realistic, but they look good, and when food looks good, that's what makes people buy things. But anyway, that's just my personal definition, and I don't know if it fits in this overall structure we have here. So we can just ignore it. But I just wanted to put it into the world. Just in case you liked it.
Now, the Narrative Consistency category and the "narrative shield" category go together in a really interesting way. These are both about stories doing what stories are supposed to do. It's about the world of the story being its own world - but its own world that exists within the rules of narratives. This can be summed up as the audience-story contract. If the fiction tells you something about itself - either in the world of the story or meta-narratively by being a certain kind of media - it should follow through and hold to those promises.
This idea of the audience-story contract covers a lot of the things that people consider "plot holes" or "unrealistic" character behaviors. When something happens in a story and it isn't exactly what would happen in reality - like, someone shooting a gun close to someone else's head, and that person not having their eardrums blown out - consider whether that "realistic" thing would actually help the story, or whether it would make the story worse.
Most of the time, those little "unrealistic" things are glossed over because it's what's best for the story. The story - or, in gaming, the experience - is what is most important. And, as consumers of art, we need to remember that. We need to learn to make these little concessions that actually help our art be more entertaining and engaging. So the audience-story contract is actually a really important element here.
And as for the element of experimentation in gaming, this one is the most personal, I think. I was talking to a friend of mine a few weeks ago while I was working on the early stages of this video, and he's really into racing sim games. Like, hardcore racing sims. And he has a whole steering wheel and pedal setup and everything. So I asked him what it is he likes about these ultra-realistic games, and he said "it's as close to real racing as I can get. I don't play to feel like I'm playing a racing game, but to feel like I'm actually driving. It's more challenging."
Immersion is about "getting into the story or game," but everyone "gets into it" in a different way. But with all simulation games, whether it's racing sims or The Sims, these games allow us to try on different clothes, put on different hats, experiment with new styles. And when we are immersed in a story, we are filling the shoes of a different life, in a different world. We're putting on their clothes. So I'm going to call this dressing up. Simulation games are now dress-up games. You heard it here first.
Now, I realize I've turned a single word into 6 different phrases, and like...37 total words, but when "realism" is so inaccurate and misused, I think it's worth coming up with new ways of describing what we're actually talking about in more precise ways. But if you can come up with better terms than I did, leave them in the comments below.
Okay, I'm going to go sit down.
Conclusion: Sounds Good
Remember how I started this video talking about The Lord of the Rings and how they made those Balrog sound effects? And I asked why we enjoy those "unrealistic" sounds more than the technically more accurate sounds? Well...I think we're prepared to answer that now.
The purpose of foley isn't to be a perfectly accurate representation of what's happening on screen. The purpose of foley is to complement - and in some cases amplify - the action happening on screen. And doing so doesn't require "realistic" sounds that are accurate to the action. It requires sounds that feel right to the audience. We don't know what a Balrog sounds like, but we know what it should feel like. 
Foley artists and sound designers do this with everything. And they do it for a good reason. Benjamin Wright, in his article "The Art and Craft of Foley," says that "cinema sound exaggerates the...intensity to convey expressively a range of details that would otherwise be lost if they were reproduced in reality. In this way, Foley sound articulates the relationship between expressivity and tactile sensation by punctuating the smallest of sounds with the dramatic intensity of a car crash."
They do this to fit all those definitions we highlighted a few minutes ago. When foley artists punctuate events, they make those events feel like they are happening to you. They sound the way we feel they should sound. And it's not because they are objectively accurate sounds. It's because they are emotionally accurate sounds.
Foley art - and sound design in general - is the perfect example of what I've been talking about in the rest of this video. And the way we view foley art is the same way we should view all art. We shouldn't care so much about our art being objectively accurate to reality. We should care about our art being emotionally accurate.
And you might be wondering, after all this time, even after we've gone through this whole video: "Why does this even matter?" Well, it matters because I believe this obsession with realism is genuinely and markedly negatively affecting our media. When we're so caught up in whether we can make things more lifelike or more gritty or violent or whatever, we lose sight of what makes art worth engaging with in the first place.
We don't go to art to just see the worst parts of the world reflected back to us. We don't go to art to watch the lives of normal, boring human beings. We go to art to be entertained, to be inspired, to be moved, to be surprised. And when everything is focused on whatever that flawed understanding of "realism" is...we lose all the heart from our art.
There's a reason Picasso started out with more realistic, lifelike portraits and then moved to his now-signature style. He realized that making things look like real life isn't really all that engaging. What's engaging is making things feel genuine. Making viewers feel things.
And I think this is actually connected to a larger issue with art, that I've wanted to talk about for a long time but just haven't gotten the chance to: the fear of sincerity. There's a growing trend in fiction  -  mostly in movies and books  -  where the stories and their characters are afraid of being sincere. They always have to make jokes and there's never time for just sitting with emotionally resonant or challenging scenes.
Like Patrick Willems suggests in his video on realism, many "less realistic" films are actually more sincere; they wholly exist in their version of reality and don't feel like they need to apologize for it. They are genuine and honest and emotionally real. [show some clip? maybe from Speed Racer or from the PHW video?] Now compare that to this clip from Marvel's Avengers: Age of Ultron, where the movie feels like it has to apologize for itself. [show the Hawkeye "I'm just a guy with a bow and arrow fighting aliens; none of this makes sense" scene]  
Now, this is a relatively new phenomenon and it's only recently gotten a name. Some folks call it the "Wedonification" of media, but it also has a more general name: Squeecore. And like I said, this is actually something I've wanted to talk about for a while, so if you'd be interested in hearing me talk more about this trend in fiction, let me know down below, because I just might make a video on it this summer.
Anyway, this obsession with realism is - I believe - making our art worse. Near the beginning of the video when I was talking about all the ways our "realistic" art isn't actually realistic, I wasn't trying to say that we should try to make things more realistic. What I was trying to say was that aiming for realism...is bad. Our art isn't realistic, and that's a good thing.
This is true for games, too. Even our most realistic survival games or simulation games know where to draw the line because too much realism in those situations is boring, and makes for bad games. No one wants to have to brush their teeth in video games to avoid digital gingivitis. ...di-gingivitis...? (No? Okay.)
But this isn't to say that you can't run your D&D games with realistic encumbrance rules or actually include tooth-brushing in your survival sims. This is to say that if you do decide to do these things, you shouldn't just do them because you think "more rules and stats = realism, and realism = good". Because doing realism for the sake of realism is...bad, actually.
Most of our best art isn't "realistic" - our art follows characters that are more interesting than normal people, more well-spoken than normal people, more skilled than normal people, who are going through cooler, more dangerous, more incredible situations than normal people. And we do that because it makes for better, more engaging, more evocative stories.
Like, look at me. This is not what I look like. I don't wear makeup every day, and when I do, I wear makeup that makes me feel confident, not makeup that looks good under box lights and through a camera lens. I write these scripts to sound casual and conversational, but every word coming out of my mouth was written weeks ago and edited and proof-read and revised and tweaked until it was exactly how I wanted to say it.
And I'm also talking to a teleprompter so that my eye-contact feels natural, even though it very much is not, especially for me. Even this set is fake. I mean, it's a real couch, and these are real books that I've actually read, but if this spare bedroom that I use for filming and streaming and writing weren't going to be on camera for hundreds of thousands of people, I would not have things organized like this. 
I have things set up like this, I write these scripts, I put on all this makeup because it makes for a better production. It is more entertaining, more engaging, and it makes me seem like a friendly, realistic person, that you really know. And all the weird parasocial stuff aside, people like things to feel like this. Even when they know it's staged. Even if it's a performance that is purposefully created to be better than anything can naturally be, it feels real. And that's what matters.
Art isn't something to be solved. It's not an equation. Art is about people, about experiences, about joy and fun and entertainment and intrigue and curiosity and thinking big thoughts and feeling big feelings. So go make art. And have fun.
End Crawl and Poem
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! This was a big one, and took a ton of research and energy - it genuinely took a lot out of me - so if you enjoyed it and would like to see more big videos like this one, then consider supporting me over on Patreon, which I have linked in the description. Joining the Patreon is the best way to support the channel, and it really does give me the freedom to make big concept videos like this one!
And there's a lot of related things I kind of wanted to talk about, but couldn't find a way to fit into this video, like the stuff about superheroes and the American monomyth, and squeecore, so if you want to see videos on either of those, be sure to let me know in the comments and I can start working on those scripts!
An extra special thanks to A Tasty Snack, Adam, Al Sweigart, Dylan, Robert Bradford, and Science Punk Sellout, without whom this video wouldn't have been possible, and - of course - another huge thank-you to Wren for sponsoring this video.
And finally, here's our Patron poem of the video. For  The Prophecy is Being Realized, Be Afraid, here's [Y]

Poem:

The Mask

I put it on every morning
that mask of smiles
made of pill bottles and practice 
and shame

it feels like a nightmare:
it digs into my face
like wisdom teeth
coming in from outside
and it hurts

and then suddenly I'm running
but I can't breathe
or scream
or tell anyone that I'm here
I'm here

they just see me 
as I run
and I smile
and they smile back






Intro
I want to tell you about a book.
It's a book set in the U.S. in the 1930s, and it's about a family from Oklahoma whose lives have been uprooted by the Dust Bowl and the Great Depression. When their farms and land are repossessed by the bank, the family decides to pick up and head West to find work. 
The book follows the family as they deal with the harsh reality of being migrant workers  -  the strain on relationships, the awful working conditions, and the physical and emotional trauma that come from how poorly they are treated by the owners and enforcers of the company farms, as well as the labor strikes when the workers rise up and demand to be treated like human beings.
The author doesn't hold back on showing the reader just how hard and ugly life was for migrant workers, including a scene describing a stillborn child  -  stillborn, presumably because of the conditions that the mother had been forced to endure: The dust, the hunger, the hard physical labor, the lack of medical supplies, the stress and anxiety and trauma of all of it.
On a literary level, the book is built on colorful descriptions; on the dark irony of comparing the beautiful, fertile land to the dirty, exhausted, overworked people; on the role of religion in the lives of folks who felt betrayed and forgotten by God; on being displaced and feeling like an outsider in your own country; and on the predatory capitalistic practices that have become synonymous with the 1930s.
There's even an extended metaphor of a small creature who is making the same hard trek as the migrants, forcing us to consider whether we are anything more than animals, blindly trying to make our way in a cruel world.

If you're familiar with American literature, then you probably recognize this as a description of the American classic The Grapes of Wrath, written by John Steinbeck.
...but it isn't.
It's a book you've probably never heard of, by an author you've probably never heard of, written before the more famous book by the more famous author, but not published until 70 years later.
This book is Whose Names Are Unknown by Sanora Babb, and her story  -  both the literal book she wrote and the story of her life  -  is incredible. But you've never heard it...because of John Steinbeck.
So, today I want to tell you a story that's a hundred years in the making  -  a story that's amazing and surprising and funny and humbling and awe-inspiring and tragic.
I want to tell you the story of Sanora Babb.

Early Biography
Childhood and Pre-FSA
Sanora Babb was born in 1907 in Otoe Territory, in land that's now Oklahoma. Her father was a gambler and their family was poor, so they moved around a lot during Sanora's childhood. 
After repeated crop failures while homesteading in the High Plains Country of Colorado and Kansas, the Babb family moved back to Oklahoma, and Sanora was able to attend school for the first time at age 11.
She was a quick learner, and she ended up graduating as valedictorian of her class.
After graduating, she went to Junior College, taught for a year, and then left to work as a journalist in Kansas for a few years before she decided to move out to L.A. to try to make it in the big city... in 1929.
[INSERT SMASH-CUT OF STOCK MARKET CRASH NEWS]
Because of the onset of the Great Depression, Sanora was homeless for much of the next decade, and took on odd-jobs here and there, including writing scripts for a local radio station and short stories and poems that were published in small literary journals.
Even though she was homeless and living in poverty, she was active in local progressive and anti-fascist political groups, who saw the rising tide of fascism that was happening in Germany.
During this time, she also met James Wong Howe, who was a Chinese-American cinematographer (and almost a professional boxer). They fell in love, but they couldn't get married because of California's laws against mixed-race couples, so they got married while they were in Europe for one of Howe's films.
Anyway, after she returned from Europe, Sanora went back home to Oklahoma to visit her family, and she saw firsthand just how destructive the Dust Bowl had been, and the toll it had taken on the people in her hometown. 
      In this little town in Oklahoma with its broken walks and dirt streets...I saw them standing in line for the meat and potatoes of relief. I saw the people I used to know who had lived smugly in their imaginary stratas...standing in line together. The essential differences in these people in the first place had been very slight, and now with the superficial gloss gone, and hunger a near and known thing to all of them, their stricken faces, one after another in the line, looked very much alike. ...They stood together forgetting their old ways...gathering into the tight knots of distress and painful wonder at this unending process of decay that levels their lives down to a single want and fear.
After seeing this  -  all this hardship and pain that her people were going through  -  Sanora decided to take action. 
The FSA Years
In the 1930s, there was a mass exodus of farmers from the drought- and dust-stricken lands of the Midwest, and all these people  -  whole families  -  were migrating westward, mostly to California. 
California was happy, at first, to have the influx of laborers, but eventually there were more people than there was work, and there was a whole microcosm of the Great Depression happening in California. 
So, the federal government stepped in, and in 1937 created the FSA  -  the Farm Security Administration  -  to figure out what to do about the displaced workers. In 1938, Sanora joined the FSA as an assistant to Tom Collins, who was a labor camp organizer.
Sanora lived and worked in the labor camps. She helped families find work and medical supplies; she fought alongside the workers as they demanded better hours, better conditions, and better pay; she joined strikes  -  and even spent a night in jail for a strike she helped organize against unpaid child labor on a walnut farm.
And during all that time she spent volunteering with the FSA, living among the shattered families who, like her, had escaped the Oklahoma droughts only to be met with disaster and ruin, Sanora Babb took notes. She was a journalist, after all.
But these notes were more than just journalism to her. In fact, she eventually wanted to write a novel based on the notes she took. She didn't want to write for commercial acclaim, but instead to send a message  -  to humanize the "Okies," the displaced workers, the hungry families, the proud, hardworking people that she knew and loved  -  so that someone, anyone, would help.
And she did. While she was working full-time in the labor camps, she spent her off-hours writing, and eventually turned her notes into a novel. She sent a few chapters of the novel to Random House publishing, and they loved it, and gave her an advance so she could focus on finishing the novel so they could publish it as soon as possible.
But "soon" wasn't enough. Before she had a chance to take her finished manuscript to New York to have it published, another book was published. A book that enraptured the nation, and  -  more importantly  -  the publishing industry.
John Steinbeck
Let's quickly take a brief aside to talk about John Steinbeck.
John Steinbeck is an American author who wrote several "classics" of American literature and film, including Of Mice and Men, East of Eden, and  -  most notably  -  The Grapes of Wrath.
A lot of folks consider The Grapes of Wrath to be the Great American Novel, and it's easy to see why. It's a beautifully written story about a simple American family struggling through the mess of American disasters that wracked the nation during the 1930s.
This novel opened people's eyes to the plight of the farmers and migrant workers who had been displaced by the drought and dust storms of the "Dust Bowl."
It was a hard, dirty, heart-wrenching time in history, and Steinbeck wanted to shine a light on all that grime and dust and death to inspire the country to help its most-struggling citizens. 
To write the novel, Steinbeck travelled to the labor camps where migrant workers lived and worked, and he collected notes on what he saw and heard during his travels. He also worked closely with Tom Collins  -  remember him?
Tom Collins acted as a sort of guide for Steinbeck, leading him through the various camps, getting him in touch with workers who lived there, and Steinbeck returned the favor by helping out a little around the camps.
Collins also helped Steinbeck by providing field notes he had collected  -  either notes he himself had taken, or those written by other FSA workers. These notes were instrumental in helping Steinbeck craft The Grapes of Wrath, since they give him insight into the real lives of the families who lived and worked in these camps. 
He simply would not have been able to write strong characters without these notes. The Grapes of Wrath as we know it would not exist without these notes.
Where the trouble comes in, though, is that some of the notes Collins provided Steinbeck came from one specific FSA worker  -  one who took her notes while she was living and working full-time as an organizer in the FSA labor camps, who was from Oklahoma (just like the migrants), and who was working on her own novel about the Dust Bowl refugees.
That FSA worker...was Sanora Babb.
The Controversy
Now, I'm not going to cast John Steinbeck as the villain of this story. There are conflicting accounts of all of this, and all the actors are dead, so the world will probably never know the truth.
We think Sanora knew Tom Collins had borrowed a copy of her notes to give to a visiting writer  -  who ended up being Steinbeck  -  but we don't actually know how forthright Tom Collins had been with her.
We don't know whether Steinbeck knew he was using notes that were written by anyone other than Tom Collins, and we definitely don't know whether he knew he was using notes from Sanora Babb specifically, even though the two had met and had dinner (along with perpetual third wheel Tom Collins) on a couple of occasions while they were both in the FSA camps.
The Grapes of Wrath was dedicated to Steinbeck's wife and to Tom Collins, indicating that Steinbeck either a) Didn't use her notes, b) Used her notes without knowing they were her notes, or c) Used her notes, knowing they were her notes, and is just an asshole who doesn't give credit where it's due.
But, again, there's just a lot we don't know for sure about this whole situation. But what we do know is the result of the situation.
We know that The Grapes of Wrath was written using FSA workers' notes, some of which were written by Sanora Babb  -  who had taken the notes to use for her own novel she was writing  -  and that The Grapes of Wrath was published just months before Babb's work was set to be published, in part because Steinbeck wrote so quickly, since he was writing full-time while Babb could only write in the evenings, since she was working at the labor camps full-time.
We know that when The Grapes of Wrath was published, it was a huge hit. It helped spread information about the struggles of the migrant workers, it was a critical success, and it was even made into a film that's still regarded as being one of the greats.
We know that Random House publishing tore up Sanora's book contract because they didn't think the literary world could support two books about the plight of the Dust Bowl migrants, and we know that Sanora quietly tucked her manuscript away and resigned herself to the reality that it was never going to be published.
Later Biography
And this is where a lot of folks end her story: Sanora Babb was just a woman who had the bad luck of trying to write the same book at the same time as a more famous writer, and she lost the race and faded into oblivion.
But that's not where our story ends.
Because after Sanora Babb was rejected by the publishers and hid her manuscript from the light of day...she got up, dusted herself off, and kept working.
She joined a writer's group that included some of the greatest names in literature, including Ralph Ellison, the black writer best known for his novel Invisible Man, with whom she also had a multiple-years-long, on-and-off affair. 
These two poor, but incredibly talented writers, were  -  to quote a Ralph Ellison biographer  -  so "nearly in love," that they braved the terrors of Jim Crow to be together.
[INSERT "I'M NOT CONDONING ADULTERY" DISCLAIMER HERE]
She was also editor of the literary magazine The Clipper, which is where some of Ray Bradbury's first short stories were published. In other words, Sanora Babb helped establish one of the most important and well-loved science fiction writers of the 20th century.
She also continued to do humanitarian work, fighting for workers' rights and other progressive causes, and throughout the 1940s she was active in several anti-Nazi efforts, including helping European artists immigrate to the U.S.
During the Red Scare of the 50s and 60s, Sanora and her husband were targeted by the House Unamerican Activities Committee hearings. She was blacklisted, but Howe was only "graylisted," so she moved by herself to Mexico to protect his film career from being damaged by their association.
While in Mexico, she worked on her own writing. In the past couple of decades, she'd consistently been publishing short stories and poems, but now she wanted to focus on long-form work, and set her sights on writing a novel. 
And in 1958 her novel The Lost Traveler was published.
She continued writing, and ended up having a memoir, a collection of short stories, a collection of poems, and even a collection of her letters published.
Sanora did eventually move back to L.A. with her husband, and they lived together until he passed away in 1976. She lived on her own for almost three decades, until she, too, passed away.
Whose Names Are Unknown
So why haven't we heard of her?
I mean, here's this woman: 
   oo --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      she's a nobody from Oklahoma, who grew up literally "dirt poor" and wasn't educated until she was 11, but ended up being valedictorian; 
   oo --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      she travelled around the world, on her own as a single woman in the 1930s; 
   oo --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      she was in multiple mixed-race relationships during a time when that was a really dangerous thing to do, for her, but especially for her partners
   oo --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      she hated Nazis, opposed fascism wherever it reared its head, and literally went to jail and was targeted by McCarthy for fighting for workers' rights; 
   oo --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      she lived and worked among migrant laborers, who trusted her because she was just like them, and who liked her because she was just, like, a really kind, compassionate human being; 
   oo --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      and her notes  -  potentially taken and used without her permission  -  were integral to the creation of The Great American Novel.
And you've never heard of her. 
Why? Because...she didn't get her novel published, because she wasn't the famous male author who was best friends with every publishing agent in New York  -  like John Steinbeck was. Because the work she did wasn't big and flashy.
But then, in 2004  -  65 years after it was written, sixty-five years of being stashed away in a drawer and hidden from the world  -  her manuscript, Whose Names are Unknown, was published by the University of Oklahoma press.
She was 97 years old. 
She died a year later.
Conclusion
I found Whose Names Are Unknown because I'm doing research into the 1930s for a writing project. Because I'm a nerd, I always read the forewords in books, and in the foreword to this one, the writer, Lawrence R. Rodgers, talks a little bit about the Babb/Steinbeck feud.
At first, when I started to look into it, I was convinced that Steinbeck was the villain  -  that he'd definitely stolen her work  -  and this was going to be a HASHTAG CANCEL JOHN STEINBECK video.
But...it's not. It's a lot more complicated than that. We don't have any hard evidence either way  -  like I said before, we don't know who knew what. If anything, it was probably just a miscommunication that's all Tom Collins' fault. 
There are some who cry "plagiarism," and even my little story at the beginning of the video leans in that direction, but the truth is that  -  while there are quite a few overlaps  -  Whose Names Are Unknown and The Grapes of Wrath have plenty of differences.
Steinbeck's book is more "literary," since it's filled with biblical allegory, but the way he frames his main characters  -  the Joad family  -  was widely criticized by actual migrant workers of the time, and even a lot of modern folks. 
Steinbeck portrayed his characters as ignorant, crass, drunkards, who ultimately mean well. Steinbeck himself even described them as "more than people"; "[t]hey must be an over-essence of people" and wrote their dialogue in  -  honestly, really distracting  -  dialect. 
Knowing the context in which he wrote the book, it's obvious to readers that Steinbeck only spent a couple weeks actually talking to these people, and most of his characterization is based on notes written by Tom Collins, who found the migrants' speech "funny" and "peculiar."
Babb's book, on the other hand, is beautifully written, but lacks the biblical allegory, instead opting to take a stronger stance on more concrete issues like workers' rights, since labor strikes are given more attention in her book than in Steinbeck's. 
And Babb's characters aren't cliché's  -  they aren't the uneducated, selfish, godless people of contemporary propaganda, but they also aren't simple-minded folk who are just there to be a vessel for the plot. 
When reading her book, it's clear that she loved and cared for these people  -  her people  -  and you really feel like you're living among them, which makes sense since Babb did live among them in her childhood and during her time in the FSA camps.
Anyway, this isn't a book review. I just want to make it clear that I'm not accusing John Steinbeck of plagiarism. But I do think Sanora Babb's book is better. It's more concise, but still beautiful, it has more complex characters, and the plot and structure fall more within Realism than within the Modern style that Steinbeck was writing in.
And I like Modernist works, don't get me wrong, but for the vast majority of readers, Whose Names are Unknown is going to be the better book.

So... There is the story of Sanora Babb.
She was an incredible woman  -  kind and smart and brave and helpful and fearless. Her life was filled with amazing things. She was kind of a badass.
And yeah, the work she did wasn't always big and flashy. But the little work  -  the grassroots work  -  the human work  -  is sometimes the most important work of all.
She is worth knowing about. And imagine how many people would know about her if she'd had her book published first  -  or if Steinbeck hadn't used her notes  -  or if...
But we'll never know. We can't change what happened almost a hundred years ago...but we can make things right. We can make Sanora Babb known, as she should have been when she was alive.
So, in lieu of making a biopic about her life  -  which would honestly be incredible, and if anyone in Hollywood wants help working on a screenplay for it, I will drop everything to work on it  -  go read her book. The thing took 70 years to come out, so it has quite a lot of lost time to make up. 
Let's make sure the story of Sanora Babb is never hidden away again.
End Crawl
Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video! I hope you enjoyed it  -  this one is a little niche, but it's a topic that is really important to me, as I'm sure you can tell.
Please like and share and subscribe and ring the bell and do all the YouTube things. If you want to follow me on Twitter you can find me at Zoe_TheBee; and if you want to follow me on Twitch, since I think I'm going to do some more Twitch streams here in the next couple weeks, you can find me at ZoeBeeYT.
I also want to give a huge thank-you to all my Patrons whose names are scrolling here beside me.
And I want to give a special shout-out to Sauber, Sigwe, A Tasty Snack, Comrade Fox, and Robert Bradford, as well as our two poem Patrons for this video, Tyler Hall and Dylan.
A Series of Haiku (for Tyler Hall)

the till penetrates
we break her skin for our bread
and then pray for rain

we lost the big sky
the dust obscures everything
but the pride of Man

lifeless but for grass
silent but for howling winds
the bison moves on


Second star to the right and straight on `til morning (for Dylan)

I want to be immortal
like a dying star
in the eyes of an astronomer.

I want to grow fat and happy 
until I can't grow anymore, 
and I burst.

I want the light waves of my life
to shoot out into the void
and spread across galaxies

and everyone can see me 
shining there on the horizon
for a brief, bright moment--

but only if they know
where to point their telescopes.

If you enjoyed those and would like to have a poem written for you and read in a video, then come join us on Patreon. The way I'm doing poems is a little different than it was, where now, for each video I'll randomly choose one Patron from the $5 tier or higher, and then write a poem for them that I'll read at the end of the video.
And I'm going to start doing that with my next video.
Anyway, this end screen has been long enough, so, until next time: Stay safe, stay warm  -  but not too warm, especially my viewers impacted by the heat wave this week... you all take care of yourselves  -  and I'll see y'all again soon, I hope. Bye folks 😊

When was the last time you had a productive debate? And by "productive" I don't mean "I totally destroyed my opponent and looked really cool" - I mean when was the last time you had a debate or argument in the comment section where you actually understood the other person and were able to reach them and maybe even change their mind?
      Productive debates on the internet are pretty rare, and I want to talk about why that is and what you can do to make your arguments better. Now, I've talked before on this channel about how to argue with conspiracy theorists, and about how narratives can help convey complex ideas, but today I want to ignore those big concepts and instead focus on some specific tools you can use to actually have productive arguments. But with that out of the way, let's jump right in, shall we?
      Before we can figure out how to make our arguments more productive, we first need to figure out what makes them unproductive in the first place. You know that feeling when you're having an argument with someone and you feel like they just aren't listening to you? Like, you're saying all this smart, well-thought-out, well-supported stuff, but it seems like they're being willfully ignorant and refusing to accept reality?
      This feeling is pretty common, especially in arguments that go down in comment sections and Twitter replies. But why does it happen? Why is it such a common thing to feel like the person you're arguing with is just not listening to you?
      Well, today I want to tell you about a little thing called "Stasis Theory" which was invented by ancient Greek philosopher Hermagoras, and it posits that there are 4 specific questions that you should ask about your argument to analyze its effectiveness. 
      Now I know that sounds really boring, but don't click away, because I'm actually not going to be using it in this traditional way. We're going to take what Hermagoras made and the way that modern teachers are using it, and we're going to throw it in the traaayyysh.
      Because when most people use Stasis Theory today - and this usually happens in college English classrooms - they're using it as what's called an invention process, which basically means they're using it to build arguments for essays. 
      But this is boring because it's a monologic process - it's one person building their own thing in their own little bubble. What we're here to talk about are dialogic processes, or...debates. Arguments. Actual conversations with actual human beings.
      So what I want to do with this video is apply Stasis Theory to internet arguments - I want to take this essay analysis tool and use it as a debate analysis tool that will actually help us see exactly where our arguments are failing.
      Now let's go back to this idea of unproductive arguments. We feel like people just aren't listening to us - we're having this argument in the comment section and we're making all these great points, but it's just not working. There's some kind of disconnect between us and the other person, but we don't know what's causing it.
      And that's where we can bring in Stasis Theory. Because what Stasis Theory does is it gives us 4 specific areas to look at to see if that's where the disconnect is occurring. Now I know this is all kind of vague and abstract right now, so let's see what this looks like in practice.
      So the first area is "reality" - which basically means that when you're arguing with someone and feel like you just can't reach them, it's because you and the other person just have two totally different ideas of what reality looks like. Or, more realistically - and maybe more graciously - you're just not on the same page about whether the problem you're debating actually even exists. 
      For instance, let's take a look at the PragerU video "The War on Cars" and pretend that we're having a debate with the speaker, Lauren Fix.
      Okay...let's unpack this. So Lauren makes a lot of...bold statements in this video, and I'm sure someone who is more of an expert than I am on actual environmental and transportation policy could poke a lot of holes in her argument.
      They could say, like, "Actually, Lauren, those environmental claims aren't accurate, because while the batteries for electric vehicles aren't the most environmentally friendly and you do still have to get power from somewhere to charge them, EV's lack of tailpipe emissions does more than make up for the emissions created by their production." 
      But that wouldn't really work to change her mind, right? Because her statements - literally everything she says in this video - is built on the belief that there is actually a war on cars. All of Lauren's ideas are predicated on the belief that the war on cars actually exists.
      So if you want to change her mind - if you want to have an actual productive argument - then the thing to do isn't to debunk all these external claims. You need to dig down to the heart of her argument - you need to find what view of reality is underneath all those other claims, and then debunk that.
      This is the first step of Stasis Theory, and because it's so basic, it's both uncommon and overlooked. Most of us have pretty similar ideas of reality - we often agree on what exists and what doesn't - but because we often agree on this, we also often forget to take a step back and ask ourselves if the person we're arguing with holds the same basic assumptions we do.
      Like, if you're arguing with your weird aunt about what to do about climate change, and she says "Well, I don't think we should be taking these drastic measures," and you're getting really frustrated with her... Stop. Take a moment, and ask yourself - "Does she even believe climate change exists?" And if the answer is "no," then that's where you need to start your debate.
      Making sure your reality is the same as someone else's is so important. Because if someone is about to enter a dangerous situation, but they don't believe that danger actually exists... Then it's going to be pretty hard to convince them they should change what they're doing.
      The next step in Stasis Theory is "Definition". So if you've determined that in this argument you're having, you and the other person do agree that whatever problem you're talking about does, in fact, exist, then the next step is to see if you agree on the details of the situation.
      To see what a problem of "Definition" actually looks like, I want to check out another PragerU video. This one is "Why I left the Left" by everyone's favorite ex-comedian Dave Rubin. In this video, regardless of how you feel about Dave Rubin or his beliefs, there's one thing you definitely need to examine before watching it or interacting with any of his claims - What does he mean by "Left"?
      Now, I'm not going to show this whole video right now (if you want to see me go through it in detail, and if you want to see my full criticism of the "War on Cars" video, too, then come join my Patreon, where you can get access to this extra content and some new behind-the-scenes stuff I've started doing!)
      But throughout this video, Rubin talks about all the bad things "The Left" believes - well...sort of. See, what he actually does in this video is talk about "progressives" and what he believes they believe - things like "Banning speakers whose opinions you don't agree with from college campuses... Prohibiting any words not approved of as "politically correct" [and] Putting "Trigger Warnings" on books, movies, music, anything that might offend people".
      And sure, you could argue with him that these things aren't happening, or that these things aren't bad, or any number of other things, but that wouldn't actually get to the core of the problem. Because the core of the problem is that...these things aren't "Left".
      Throughout this whole video, Rubin conflates "leftist" with "progressive," and he never actually stops to define what "Left" actually means to him. His definition of "Left" isn't inaccurate - it's not even there!
      This kind of thing is bad because while it is possible he's assuming his audience has the same definitions as him, the problem comes when he starts arguing with people who don't necessarily have the same definition as him. Because when you are trying to move forward or explain things, you need to be starting from common ground - you need to know exactly who/what you're talking about.
      And this is part of why lists like these are so nefarious. Because they're taking advantage of a miscommunication of Definition. With these kinds of "translations," the author is poisoning the well, telling you what other people mean when they say things, without any actual evidence to back them up.
      They're saying "Hey, this definition that you thought you knew? It's a lie. You're wrong. You're being lied to." Or "This person you thought you were on the same page with? They're lying to you. They're trying to trick you. Here's what they're actually saying to you."
      And of course their definitions still aren't in line with how people are actually using these terms, because everything James Lindsay does is a bad-faith grift, but that's neither here nor there...
      Problems of Definition aren't super common, but it's still important to be able to recognize them, when they do happen, so any time you're in an argument with someone, it's always good practice to share how you're defining the terms you're using, just to make sure you and your opponent are on the same page.
      The next step is "Quality", where your argument is stuck on the question of "Is this thing good or is it bad?" This one is pretty uncommon, because I think a lot of questions of "good or bad" actually come down to one of the other Stasis Theory questions.
      Like, if you're talking to someone about the COVID vaccine because it's bad (for whatever reason), then that "badness" can usually come down to the "reality" question (do the supposed problems with the vaccine actually exist?). 
      Or, like with your climate change aunt, if she did eventually agree that climate change exists, she might still disagree with you that it's a bad thing. But that could come down to the "definition" question, because maybe she thinks "climate change" just means "warmer weather," which...is a good thing.
      But one way we can think about the problem of Quality is as less of a "is this thing good or bad?" question, and more of a question of "how good or bad is this thing?". In other words, the problem of Quality comes down to how serious you and your opponent think the issue at hand is.
      Because even if your aunt did believe that climate change had some negative effects, she might think those effects aren't that bad that we need to take any drastic action, or she might think that the negative effects won't happen for hundreds of years, so she doesn't think we need to worry about it. Either way, your argument would now be stuck on the question of Quality.
      Anyway, while it is still important to be able to identify problems of quality, they're not quite as common, so I'm not going to spend a ton of time on it. Let's move on.
      The final part of Stasis Theory is the problem of Policy. Now, this one is the most common and the easiest to spot, because this is the level that most arguments happen at. Most of our discussions and debates are about what to do about something, and that is where this problem of Policy comes in.
      Once you've come to agree that a problem exists, and once you've nailed down the details and know that the problem is bad and needs solving, you then have to figure out how to solve it. And, like I said, this is the level that most arguments happen at.
      But because most arguments happen at this level, that means that most issues - or most areas where there is some kind of disconnect between you and the other person - happen at the previous 3 levels. 
      So even if you think you're having a debate about what to do about -- I don't know... Tax reform? -- you might not actually be able to get anywhere because you two aren't on the same page about reality or specific details of the situation or how serious the problem is.
      We usually think of our arguments in terms of Policy, because that's what's most accessible, but what Stasis Theory helps us do is to think of our arguments in terms of the other three steps as well. Because most of the time, when an argument feels like it's going nowhere, it's because we've mistakenly thought of it in terms of Policy, when in reality what we're actually in conflict over is Reality, Definition, or Quality.
      All four of the Stasis Theory questions are valuable, but it's also important to remember that they build on one another (which is why you need to go through them in order). You can't have a productive debate about Policy if you don't agree on the details first, but you can't figure out the details if you don't already agree on what does or does not exist in the first place.
      And that is why Stasis Theory is such a great tool.
      Once we've used Stasis Theory to find out where this miscommunication is happening, then we can start to find Stasis - the balance where both parties are in agreement, so the argument can actually continue on productively. 
      And the way to do that is actually pretty straightforward. You simply ask the other person. Because what Stasis Theory reveals is that a lot of our arguments fail because we make assumptions about the other person's beliefs. Either we put words in their mouths unfairly, or we assume they agree with us on more than they actually do.
      Either way, when we find that our arguments are stalling out, and we feel like the other person just isn't listening to us, we need to stop, take stock of what has been said so far, and start to think more critically about not just what our opponent believes, but why they believe it.
      In other words, go back through the Stasis Theory questions like a little checklist, and measure your opponent's statements against it. What do their statements reveal about what they believe reality is? What do they reveal about the definitions they're using for certain terms? What do they reveal about how seriously they're taking certain problems? Once you've done that and you think you have a good idea of which area is causing the disconnect, then you can start to ask them questions relating to that area. 
      For instance, if you were talking to someone about gun control and school shootings, but they seem to believe that it's really not that big of a deal, and you are just so utterly confused by that, you might want to go back through and analyze what they believe because maybe your argument isn't working on them because they believe that most school shootings have been false flag events.
      And once you ask them questions that can confirm that that's what they believe, then you know where you need to begin to break down their argument, and that is when you can start having an actually productive discussion.
      Now, obviously, these 4 things aren't magic beans that will suddenly sprout into beanstalks of universal peace and harmony. But they will help you to have more productive arguments and give you some tools that will help you argue in ways that don't make people hate you.
      What I think is the coolest thing about Stasis Theory is that once you know about it, you start seeing it everywhere. Seriously, I think that almost every argument can be broken down into one of the Stasis Theory categories:
      "Only women should be allowed in women's restrooms" 
      Problem of Definition - I see trans women as women, but they don't.
      "We need to limit welfare!"
      Problem of Quality - Progressives see welfare as helpful to folks experiencing poverty; conservatives see welfare as damaging because it prevents people from learning to support themselves.
      "We need to limit welfare because people take advantage of it"
      Problem of Reality - There is a statistically negligible number of people who "cheat the system" and "welfare queens" don't exist.
      "Pro-choice people want to kill babies!"
      Problem of Definition - Pro-choice people don't see fetuses as "babies" (at least before a certain point of development) whereas pro-life people do. It comes down to how you define "baby."
      "To fix the wealth gap, we should tax the wealthy"
      Problem of Policy - You might believe the wealth gap exists and is a problem, but you might think there are other solutions to fixing it. 
      I genuinely believe that pretty much any argument can be broken down this way, and once you start to see it, it's everywhere. It is such a useful tool, and that is why it should be in everyone's argumentation arsenal.
      "How to Win" and Conclusion
      Alright, thanks for watching! If you liked the video, then--
      [phone rings]
      Hello? Charlie the editor? What do you want?
      Oh, we're titling the video "How to Argue on the Internet And Win???" Well I haven't talked about that at all. I thought this was about how to have productive and useful conversations where you actually listen to the other person, and--- No?
      Oh... Okay... Well, in that case...
      Listen, do you want to win your arguments? Well,  if your goal when you argue is to "beat" the other person and make yourself look really cool and smart - then forget everything I said in the past [X] minutes. Just ignore my advice. Because if you use this method to identify miscommunication and assumptions, then you might end up seeing that you're the one who's actually in the wrong. 
      If you want to "win" arguments, there are lots of sneaky little rhetorical tricks you can pull, like playing with logic and making different kinds of appeals and overwhelming your opponent with lots of statistics - or even just talking really fast (looking at you, Beeb Shabipi).
      And those are all great ways to argue with people and DESTROY THEM, but before you go out and do that, stop for a second and think about what you think the goal of arguments should be. And if you think they should be about destruction, then great. Go out and destroy, you little monsters.
      But what I believe is that arguments should be about communicating and discovering truth together. So if you want to do that - if you want to work with folks to figure out how we can all move forward together - then the first step is making sure you're all on the same page. Because understanding is the most important ingredient in conversation, and conversation is the best way to change hearts and minds.
      Thanks for watching `til the end! I really enjoyed indulging my English professor roots with this one, so if you liked this video and want to see more things like it, be sure to like and subscribe and comment down below to let me know if you want me to do more stuff like this!
      If you want more of me, you can find me on Twitter @Zoe_TheBee and on Patreon at patreon.com/zoe_bee, where you can join all these wonderful people whose names you see scrolling here beside me, and where you can get early access to videos, polls, poems, and extra videos I release only to my Patrons.
      I also want to give an extra special thank-you to [Patrons].
      And last but not least, here's our Patreon Poem of the video. For [Patron] here's "Instructions for Seeing".
      
      Instructions for Seeing (for [Patron])
      
      Forget opening your eyes - shut out the bright whiteness
      and applaud the tiny pink dancers behind your eyelids
      who skirt out of sight like nervous bubbles at your glance.
      
      Breathe in the green around you, the warm ground smells 
      like cinnamon and promises.
      
      Recall the taste of Pop-Rocks and lemon juice 
      and your first shot of bottom-shelf whiskey.
      Do you remember how bright it was in your mouth
      and your throat and your chest and your belly
      and how it almost made your eyes water
      but you grinned past the tongue-tingles and tears?
      
      Listen for your heartbeat. 
      That sound inside your chest is spoken in the language of the universe 
      and it means "You are alive and you are here, and there is so much 
      you can do and be and feel and find and love out there."
      Do you hear that?
      That's the miracle of you.
      
      Open your eyes.
      
      And until next time... Stay safe, stay warm, and I'll see y'all again soon, I hope.
      Bye, folks :)
      
      
      
Steak-umm and the Downfall of Society | A Response

Hi all!
I know I said I was taking a little hiatus  -  and I totally am, I'm actually recording this while I'm taking a break from packing  -  but I have experienced something today that broke my brain, and I just had to talk about it.
This morning, when I woke up and checked Twitter, I witnessed the worst series of tweets I have ever seen. 
I am, of course, talking about the thread about media literacy and expertise posted by the "I can't believe this isn't a health code violation" company, Steak-umm.
A company that sells meat-adjacent products is talking about media literacy on Twitter? I hear you ask.
Yes. Yes they are.
And this isn't the first time they've done something like this.
See, in the land of Brand Twitter, where household products and fast-food companies are personified by underpaid marketing employees working for corporations desperately trying to hold onto some semblance of relevance in ever increasingly saturated markets, it's hard to stand out. 
But Steak-umm... They didn't just try to be an average person. No, they tried something new. And it's paid off.
But before we get into the newest thread, we need to go back  -  all the way back to the Before Times  -  to trace Steak-umm's history in the hopes that it'll help us solve the mystery of why the [fuck] they are the way they are.
We're going back... to the ancient year... of 2017.
[some kind of "dun, dun, duuuuuuun"]
On August 10[th], 2017, Steak-umm hired a new social media manager. 
Things were pretty normal  -  the standard fare you see from brand accounts  -  until October of that year, when the new guy started to branch out and get a little more creative.
See, the "Steak-umm persona" he was going for was pure "[shit]-poster"  -  things like memes, jokes, self-deprecating humor, absurdity, weird poetry.
You know. [Shit] posts.
But mixed in with these [shit] posts were weirdly motivational, positive messages. Tweets about working hard and not letting failure stop you from following your dreams.
And on October 20[th], 2017, as part of one of these positive-message tweets, we were given the first instance of the now-infamous catchphrase: "Steak-Umm bless".
It wasn't long until their "weird humor plus periodic positivity" soup started to have a new ingredient mixed in: Wokeness.
Now, as I'm sure most of you know, I'm a fan of... y'know... Equality. Social justice. Economic justice. Et cetera... 
So when I say "wokeness," it isn't some kind of dog-whistle. I mean it in the genuine, "social justice-y" way. I'm just using it because I think it's the most concise way to encapsulate the kind of stuff I'm talking about.
Anyway, it was in mid-November of 2017 that Steak-umm started to incorporate that kind of woke language into their tweets. On November 10[th], they tweeted about all the "sickening injustice" in our world.
The thing about this language is that it barely even counts as "woke"  -  I mean, I'd wager that most people hate "sickening injustice." But what this tweet says to me is that the social media guy was testing the waters to see how people would respond.
And they responded pretty positively. The tweet didn't blow up, but it did okay. It was a success.
This continued, and as they grew, they started to incorporate more and more of this anti-big business, pro-social justice language into their tweets, like this one about how they support net-neutrality.
Near the end of 2017, they pulled back the curtain a little, and had a whole thread about how some people feel "tricked" because of how "real" the account seems, but that they promise that "there were no corporate meetings with dudes in suits trying to figure out how to trick millennials into thinking the Steak-Umm twitter isn't actually a brand. [Because] if that were the case [they'd] come off way more r/fellowkids esque."
In other words, "No, I actually am just like you! The company that hired me isn't controlling what I tweet! So that means Steak-umm is good, actually!"
Anyway, this continued into 2018, when they posted about how they wanted to "overthrow corrupt oppressors" and even wrote a whole mock "State (Steak) of the Union Address," and they had a tweet about how sexism is bad that was fairly successful.
But, it turns out that 2018 was the year they really came into their persona  -  this is when the Steak-umm we know today was born.
It was the year of the First. Big. Thread.
On September 26[th], 2018, Steak-umm  -  the brand of almost-meat created specifically so you don't have to chew it  -  wrote a thread about Millennial nihilism [include O Fortuna music here?]:
            "why are so many young people flocking to brands on social media for love, guidance, and attention? I'll tell you why. they're isolated from real communities, working service jobs they hate while barely making ends meat, and are living w/ unchecked personal/mental health problems.
            they're crushed by student loan debt, disenfranchised by past generations, and are dreading the future of our world every day from mass media addiction and the struggle to not just be happy, but to survive this chaotic time with every problem happening at once under a microscope.
            they grew up through the dawn of internet culture and have had mass advertising drilled into their media consumption, now they're being resold their childhoods by remakes, sequels, spinoffs, and other cheap nostalgia, making them more cynical to growth or authenticity.
            they often don't have parents to talk to because they say stuff like "you don't know how good you have it," and they don't have mentors to talk to because most of them have no concept for growing up in this strange time, which perpetuates the feeling of helplessness/loneliness.
            they have full access to social media and the information highway, but they feel more alone and insecure than ever. being behind a screen 24/7 has made them numb to everything, anxious and depressed about everything, and vitriolic or closed off toward anyone different from them.
            young people today have it the best and the worst. there's so much to process and very few trusted, accessible outlets to process it all through. so they go to memes. they go to obscure or absurdist humor. they go to frozen meat companies on twitter. end rant
            Steak-umm bless."

So yeah. That was their first Big Thread. 
And it blew up. People loved it.
Imagine: the twitter account of a barely-consumable, only-meat-because-of-a-technicality was doing real, serious analysis of our current culture.
People ate it up.
[pun intended]
Then, three days later, before most of the world had completed their refractory period, Steak-umm hit them again, this time offering a list of basic advice for how to "share and shape opinions".
After these two threads, the world would never be the same.
Steak-umm had officially become the mascot of level-headed, rational thinker on the Internet.

And that trend  -  [shit]-posts plus positivity plus threads of serious cultural analysis  -  continued for a few years up to July 29[th], 2021, when they released yet another Twitter thread.
This time, the thread was about "societal distrust in experts and institutions, the rise of misinformation, cultural polarization, and how to work toward some semblance of mutually agreed upon information before we splinter into irreconcilable realities."
Now, I'm not going to read the whole thing because it's very, very long, and I have it linked in the description if you want to check it out, but honestly, the actual content of the thread itself isn't really all that important.
What's important is people's reaction to it.
See, just like with the other threads, people loved it.
They loved it so much, in fact, that they decided to go out and buy Steak-umm.

Now... This is where the problem comes in. This is why this thread enraged me down to my core.
Because this thread  -  and not just this thread but all the threads Steak-umm makes  -  aren't actually about social justice.
They're about frozen sheets of meat.
They are about... Money.

Something that I've talked about before on this channel [insert screen-cap of Food Conspiracy Video Thumbnail] is how companies only exist to make money.
My previous video essay on the topic was mostly focused on the health angle  -  how food companies will only make healthy foods if it's profitable, and how they market foods as "healthy" even if they aren't, because the veneer of healthiness looks appealing to consumers  -  but this applies to all kinds of marketing.
Companies literally will only do something if it makes them money. That's capitalism, folks. [ insert either "That's all, folks!" from looney toons, or "That's relativity folks" (with my voice saying "capitalism" dubbed in) from Interstellar)
When they make jokes, when they tweet about relatable situations, when they post about politics (without actually making substantive changes to back up their words with action), they're doing all that just to get you to like them. 
Because if you like them, you'll buy whatever they're selling.
When you see their tweets and you think "Man, that makes me want to buy some Steak-umm!" or "Wow, this company has similar values to me  -  I want to support them by buying their product!" you are falling for corporate propaganda.

Now, I know there are lots of criticisms you can make of my point. Plenty of people have done so in my Twitter replies already. But I'll still offer a little bit of a preemptive response here:
All the things this Steak-umm account says are things I agree with. And having good ideas in the world is a good thing. But what isn't a good thing is how this affects our behavior.
See, Steak-umm isn't a person. Their account is run by a person, but the company itself is a company. People are good, companies... aren't. Companies do anything  -  say whatever they think people want to hear  -  if it will make them money.
So it's not that I think these threads are the worst, most dangerous evil in the world. They aren't.
But I do think they work to trick people into thinking brands can be our friends, that companies do care about social and economic justice. But they don't.
We've been convinced to trust the marketing of a company to educate us on serious issues. But  -  and maybe this is a radical notion  -  I think we don't need a brand of barely-beef to tell us how to engage with other people in intellectually honest ways.
But worst of all, I think these kinds of things make us complacent. They make us think that by buying frozen air-quotes "meat," we are doing something good. We're supporting a company that has our values, right?
There is something to be said for supporting businesses whose messages you believe in. I think that's a good thing.
But  -  A  -  does the business actually support those ideals? Or do they just say they support them, without backing up those claims with action? Or is it just the social media guy who supports those ideals, and the company lets him do whatever he wants because clearly it's working  -  no one has thought about Steak-umm this much in years!
And  -  B  -  if you're only buying something because a social media manager posted on Twitter about how we need to trust scientists and listen to each other and get out of our echo chambers, is anything actually getting done?
Or are you just spending your money on a product because of a crummy commercial?
It is a commercial. It always was, and it always has been. And if you keep buying these products and promoting the pages who do stuff like this, it's going to continue.
And I don't mean that companies are suddenly going to fight for social and economic justice. I mean their social media managers are going to tweet about social and economic justice.
And every retweet is another ounce of free advertising you're giving them, all while you feel guilt-free because this company happens to be "one of the good ones".
And nothing will change.
Consumption isn't activism. Consumption is something we have to do to survive in this world, and if you enjoy Steak-umm, follow your gross little dreams. But don't confuse "doing exactly what the marketing team wanted you to do" with "substantive change."
Don't think that a social media page  -  a page built specifically to get you to buy a product  -  is ever worth listening to about anything.
It's an ad. And you fell for it.

Thank you for watching til the end! I need to get back to packing, so I'm going to make this quick, but this video was brought to you by all my wonderful patrons whose names are scrolling by here, and I want to give a huge thank-you to Sauber, Sigve, A Tasty Snack, Comrade Fox, Robert Bradford, Jameson Huddle, Mohammed Al-Sabah, Dylan, Merritt Grames, and Adam.
And until next time...
Stay safe. Stay warm.
And I'll see y'all again, soon.
Bye, folks 😊
Conspiracy Theory Deep Dive

Conspiracy Theories: You love  them, you hate them, you make fun of people for falling for them, and you might just believe in one or two yourself. 
Today, I want to look at what exactly conspiracy theories are, what makes them so attractive (even to otherwise reasonable people), and what can be done to curb the rise of conspiracy thinking and the issues that come along with it.
This video is mostly for people who have loved ones who are conspiracy theorists and hope to get them out of that kind of thinking. But, if you are a conspiracy theorist yourself, I want to get something out of the way right off the bat: I don't think you're crazy. I don't think you're stupid. I think you are right to question all the weird and uncomfortable elements of the world we live in. I think you are smart, and I wish that more people were as intellectually curious as conspiracy theorists. But...I still think you are wrong. And I hope you will still listen, even if it's just so you can argue against me. But do know that I respect you, and that this video is made, in part, for you..
With that out of the way, I hope you will come with me as I explore the internet's favorite pastime of diving down the rabbit hole, and see where we come out on the other side. 
Without further ado, let's get started.
*sitting in chair, on computer, laughing periodically, typing, etc.*
*bursts into room* Stop!
*Turns* What the hell? Who are you?
*gasping* I'm you, from another dimension. I was sent here to stop you.
Uh...okay. Cool. So is this, like, time-travel rules? Like, is your being here going to, I don't know, break the universe or something?
Uh, no.
Ah, damn, I was hoping it would. Wait, so why do you look like that? 
Rude.
*puts hands up defensively* sorry...
Anyway, I'm here to stop you from being mean on the internet.
Rude. I'm not mean.
Okay, what were you doing? Just now? On your computer?
Oh, uh...responding to a Facebook comment. Some crazy conspiracy theorist. You know how it is.
What'd you say?
*hands computer*
*reading* "Imagine believing in chemtrails. lol. Sounds like you need to go back to school, before your ignorance infects anyone else. The science is there and Google is free, it's not that hard."

*grimace/cringe*
Okay, well when you read it like that... But I'm not wrong. All the information is there, you just have to be willing to look it up. 

I mean, this is why people don't take conspiracy theorists seriously. They're out of touch with reality. They're all just crazy, paranoid science-deniers who live in their mom's basement.


Who is a conspiracy theorist? Well, that depends on how you define "conspiracy," "conspiracy theory," and then, "conspiracy theorist." 
"Conspiracy Theory" at least the way we usually use it, is kind of an umbrella term that can cover everything from 9/11 truth and the JFK assassination to bigfoot and aliens to the Illuminati and our government being run by lizard people.
The study of conspiracy theories is relatively new - even though conspiracy theories themselves have been around for literally centuries - but scholars have mostly come to agreement on what conspiracies and conspiracy theories are.
      "We define conspiracy as a secret arrangement between two or more actors to usurp political or economic power, violate established rights, hoard vital secrets, or unlawfully alter government institutions to benefit themselves at the expense of the common good...Conspiracy theory refers to an explanation of past, ongoing, or future events or circumstances t hat cites as a main causal factor a small group of powerful persons, the conspirators, acting in secret for their own benefit and against the common good." (Conspiracies 48)
So what does this mean? Well, basically, a conspiracy is when a group of powerful people do something in secret that's good for them, but bad for the public. And a conspiracy theory is when people think that some event or circumstance is caused by a conspiracy, even if the "official story" do esn't agree.
This definition is still a little broad, but it does help us narrow things down a little. For instance, with this definition, the mere belief in aliens doesn't make someone a conspiracy theorist. A person only becomes a conspiracy theorist if they believe aliens exist, and the government is hiding their existence from the public for...some...nefarious reason.
This definition also shows the difference between conspiracies and conspiracy theories. Basically, conspiracies are true - they are events where people in power covered something up or hid something from the public, and there is enough evidence of it that a majority of experts agree that the conspiracy happened. For example, take the Tuskegee Syphilis Experiment, where the U.S. Public Health Service knowingly infected hundreds of black men with syphilis in a study from the 1930s through the 1970s. The men were told they were being given free health care. The government gave them a disease, instead.
Conspiracy theories, on the other hand, are just that - theories. They are, as-yet-unproven suspicions about the facts of a particular event or group, usually going against the establishment's story.
From this, we can get a definition of conspiracy theorist. A conspiracy theorist is a person who believes that some event has been caused by a group of powerful people for reasons that benefit them, to the detriment of the public good.
Now, again, this is a little broad. Statistically, almost 2/3s of Americans are - using this definition - "conspiracy theorists". Does that number sound a little high to you? Well, consider that the JFK assassination is a conspiracy. Do you really believe the official report? If not...you're a conspiracy theorist.
You could also consider some more mainstream economic views to be conspiracy theories. Take, for instance, the platform of Bernie Sanders, who believes that the top 1% are conspiring against the working class to hoard wealth. Now...I'm not saying this is right or wrong [insert "it's right' text], but if you believe this, you are a conspiracy theorist.
But does this make all of us "conspiracy theorists"? Even if you believe a couple of conspiracies, you probably don't consider yourself a conspiracy theorist, right? It's okay; most people don't. The term is pretty loaded, and not in a good way. It's come to be synonymous with "crazy," or "paranoid," and even it carries some political baggage.
But most of the negative connotation associated with conspiracy theories is actually unwarranted. Conspiracy theorists aren't crazy, or irrational, or stupid. People usually think of conspiracy theorists as out of touch with reality or that they have some kind of clinical paranoia disorder. That's not true. Statistically, conspiracy theorists have mental illnesses at the same exact rate as everyone else. 
And, from an evolutionary perspective, it just makes sense. Think about it - if you are a cave-person and you see a rustling in the bushes, you should assume that there is something dangerous behind it, because then you'll be prepared for the worst case scenario, which is how you survive. And that's what conspiracy theorists are doing. Conspiracy thinking is simply choosing to believe that there are dangerous people behind the rustling all around us... 
*NOTHING HERE*
*hands back computer* So, can I come in?
Only as long as you stay 6 feet away. Social distancing and all that.
*rolls eyes* Seriously? You know COVID's basically just the flu, right?
*sighs* Oh no... You're one of those people?
"Those people" Listen to you.... *shakes head* Alright, well I'd like to talk to you, so if I have to follow this arbitrary rule to do so, I guess I can. Just know I'm going to hate it the entire time.
Okay, well what did you want to talk about? O-other than making fun of my writing.
Well, it is kind of about your writing. The way you talk about conspiracy theories is...kinda shitty, you know that?
I mean...conspiracy theories are kinda shitty, too. We live in a post-truth, fake news, alternative facts world now, didn'tya know?
Whatever you say.
No, I'm serious. Conspiracy theories are taking over. They're ruining our democracy.
Well, first of all, conspiracy theories have been around forever. A lot of beliefs are decades, if not centuries, old.
Yeah, like flat earth. So old that people were debunking it 300 years ago.
And even with those so-called "debunkers" Flat Earthers have stuck around. What does that do if not confirm the validity of Flat Earth theory?
Wait, wait, hang on. You're telling me you're a Flat Earther?
*nod*
Yeah, and next you're going to tell me you think the moon landing was fake...
The moon landing was fake.
Wait, so...if you're me, and I don't believe these conspiracies, why do you?
*shrug* I just care more about the truth, I guess.

Conspiracy theories are as old as civilization. They are not a new phenomenon by any means. They are ancient, they span generations and religious affiliations and political parties - no one group has sole rights to conspiracy thinking.
But, knowing this, it can be hard to pinpoint what exactly draws people in. I mean, if conspiracy theories are universal, there must also be some universal human trait that predisposes people to conspiracy thinking.
So if we know that conspiracy theorists aren't "crazy," then...what are they? I mean, why do some people believe conspiracies and others don't?
Well, it's complicated. People don't believe conspiracies because they have better facts. Because they don't. That's why they're conspiracy theories and not "accepted journalistic truth." People believe conspiracy theories because they give them comfortable answers to uncomfortable questions.
The big question that conspiracy theory scholars are trying to answer is what makes a person more or less likely to be drawn to conspiracy theories. What makes someone reject the accepted truth and instead find their answers in conspiracies? Well...there are a few theories.
The most popular theory - probably because it's so inflammatory - is the"loser" theory, which posits that people are more likely to believe conspiracy theories when they are on the losing side of an election. People don't like to feel powerless, so they look for answers for why their powerlessness isn't actually valid. If they lose, it's not because they're actually wrong, it's because the other side cheated.
That's where a lot of political conspiracies come from. Take the Obama birther conspiracy. Those on the losing side of the election - Republicans - were more likely to believe the idea that Obama was illegitimate because it would mean that he was a liar and a cheater, that Republicans were honest, that they were the real winners.
Or, consider the "RussiaGate" conspiracy: Democrats wanted to believe that Trump colluded with Russia - whether or not there was enough evidence to back it up - because it would mean that he wasn't fit to be president. It would mean that they still deserved to be in power. They were still in the right.
Alright, so you believe COVID is fake, that the Earth is flat, and that we never landed on the moon. Anything else I should know about?
Um...I think Trump is a Russian-controlled puppet and Putin is pulling the strings in an attempt to take over the US?
*taken aback*....oh. Well, I mean...yeah. Obviously Trump is too stupid to have won of his own accord. I don't know that I'd call that a "conspiracy theory", but...
*rolls eyes* You just don't want to call it a conspiracy theory because you happen to believe it, and you don't want to think of yourself as a "conspiracy theorist."
You are. Accept it.

The "loser theory" is applicable in some cases, but not all conspiracies are pvolitical - and also it's just an inflammatory label that doesn't do anyone any good - so it's not the best.
Now, there's also the social theory. In this theory, people are drawn toward conspiracies because they are looking for a community. For some reason or another, they have lost their community, or they feel socially insignificant. People want to feel powerful, unique, desirable, part of a team. Conspiracy theory groups offer a community where you get to feel special.
Think about the Flat Earth groups. Often, people start to believe in the Flat Earth model because it offers them an alternative story: They would rather believe that we are one-of-a-kind, that the universe literally revolves around us, than the truth - that we are a group of sentient primates stumbling around on a rock spinning at a thousand miles an hour, hurtling through the vacuum of space toward no discernable end.
The reality...kinda sucks. It means we're small. We're insignificant. But...if you believe we live on a flat plane - the only ones of our kind, and that this knowledge is special, unique, granted to only a select few, and that this knowledge allows you to fight against power structures that you believe are unjust and lying to the rest of the public, and that this means you get to be part of a group of enlightened freedom fighters who protect and defend each other??
Hell yeah, that sounds great. I'd love to be part of a group like that. Who wouldn't?
How did you even end up believing some of the other crap, though? I mean, we literally dated an engineer - it's not like science is some kind of foreign concept to us.
Well...Reed and I broke up, actually. A couple years ago, now. 
Really? What happened?
I was watching YouTube. Flat Earth debunking videos, actually. And the algorithm ended up recommending some videos from Flat Earth people.
They responded to the debunkers. And they were, like...really nice about it. They're a lot more charismatic and stuff.
Anyway, I started asking Reed about it, to see if he could explain some of the things that they brought up, and he was...kinda condescending. 
He couldn't answer the questions. And he was an ass about it. And he thought I was going crazy. So we ended up breaking up.
But some of the Flat Earth people I've met over the years...they've been so kind to me. They're a better family than Reed ever was.

While there are many conspiracy theorists who fall within this category, the "Social theory" doesn't explain everything about how some people fall into conspiracy thinking. For that, we have to turn to the "uncertainty theory".
In uncertainty theory,  people believe in conspiracies because they are confronted by something that the "official story" can't satisfactorily answer. They are drawn to conspiracies because the "truth" is uncomfortable and doesn't really mesh with their expectations of reality. If you feel that "official story" of an event doesn't have a good, coherent, believable narrative, then you may seek closure elsewhere - one of the places you may find your answer...could be in a conspiracy theory. 
Take the mass shooting in Las Vegas from 2017. In the wake of the event, there were conflicting accounts - about how many shooters there were, about who the shooter was, about how many people were injured and killed. It was chaos and confusion. And chaos and confusion is uncomfortable. We like to have details and clear understanding. But when people didn't get those details (like the number of shooters) - or when the details conflicted with their worldview (like that the shooter was a middle-aged white man, not the kind of perpetrator that many people were expecting) - people looked elsewhere for answers that would fit better with their worldview.
And one answer was that the shooter was planted - it was a "false flag" attack, an attack that was planned by the government as an excuse to do something else, probably pass harsher gun control legislation. Because the official answers didn't feel right, they found other answers that felt like they were more realistic. 
Another example of this is the Boston Marathon Bombing. In the official story, a bomb - planted in a terrorist plot - exploded near the finish line of the Boston Marathon, killing several and injuring even more. It was deadly, gruesome, and tragic. 
So why do people think it's a conspiracy? Because it doesn't "look right." Because the blood was too bright red. Because people ran away, even with terrible and debilitating injuries. It didn't look right.
Yeah, but how can you believe some of this stuff? I get that people are nice to you, and that's great, but how can you just ignore the science?
I'm not ignoring the science, I'm trusting my own eyes. I know when something looks wrong. Like the supposed "curvature of the earth." You can't see that.
...Yes you can.
No you can't. And I don't know why you would even want to. Why do you cling so hard a theory that - if true - would mean that your life is meaningless?
Because it's the truth. Because your theory is wrong. Because scientists do really hard work to become experts, so the least we can do is trust them. Because anything else is crazy.
It's not crazy. It's Zeteticism - an ancient philosophy where we trust ourselves over strangers. Wanting to believe our eyes and ears over some scientists stuck in a lab somewhere isn't a new or weird thing. 
In fact, it has more of a basis than some of the "science" that you guys push. We have the plain facts on our side: You can't see the curve. It's obvious. How can you argue with that?

The uncertainty theory relies on how events feel to people. Whether they look right. Whether the official story matches people's personal experiences. 
When reality doesn't match what we expect to happen - when we see something that isn't like anything else we've seen before - it freaks us out, and we search for answers anywhere we can find them. We want reassurance that our eyes and ears and memories are infallible. And conspiracy theories often give us that reassurance.
But...they are still wrong. And knowing why people believe lies isn't as important as figuring out how to get them to believe in the truth again. Now, there are a lot of different ways people have suggested "debunking" conspiracy theorists. And...most of them don't work. 
Some people just make fun of conspiracy theorists and mock them. And, yeah I get it. It's fun. We all want to dunk on people who we think are stupid. It feels good to feel smarter than someone else. But like...maybe don't? Like we just discussed, conspiracy theorists aren't unintelligent or paranoid or mentally ill. They just happened to have the right concoction of uncertainty or fear or loneliness at the right time for a conspiracy theory to look like an attractive answer to their questions. Mocking someone will literally never get them to change their mind.
Others try the info-dump method, where they just throw every single piece of information - every math formula and science paper and famous-person-quote - they can get their hands on at their conspiracy theorist friend. This...also doesn't work. People aren't really receptive to mountains of math and science. And this isn't specific to conspiracy theorists. This is just...how humans are. We have a hard time conceptualizing things. So...this method is also a no-go. 
Some people are aware that they need to provide facts, and so they turn to experts. But...these so-called educators aren't actually very good at changing people's minds.
Neil deGrasse Tyson, for example, is notorious for being passive-aggressive and pompous on social media. Or, consider the popular "I Fucking Love Science" page. Media like this is only convincing for one group - the people who alre ady believe it.
It does no good for people who need scientific information the most.
Now, this isn't exclusive to the side of facts. Conspiracy theorists also have their echo c  hamber media outlets. But what we do about those...is a subject for another video....
So what are we supposed to do? I mean, if we can't use facts and logic to change minds, how are we supposed to save our loved ones from the grasp of the rabbit hole? Well, there are a couple of answers...
One answer is to just...not. To just avoid debating conspiracy theorists. Because, in the age of the internet, good ideas often get drowned out by theatrics. Memes that sound good will always be more convincing than well-reasoned but boring (or heavy-handed) arguments, so...what's even the point in arguing?
If you are trying to change the mind of your loved one, though, this answer isn't really viable. You can't just ignore them forever. In fact, ignoringv them could end up alienating them and pushin g them even further down the rabbit hole. So what do you do? How exactly do you change t  he mind of a conspiracy theorist?
Well...first, you approach them with respect. 
Listen, I'm sorry I've been so rude. It just feels like there's such a pervasive culture of ignorance and misinformation... It's overwhelming.
Yeah, I get that. 
So...would you be up for, like, actually talking about your beliefs? 
Are you going to be a bitch about it?
*rolls eyes* I'll try my hardest to rein in the condescension. 
Then yes. I'd love to talk about my beliefs.

People love talking about themselves. Conspiracy theorists also, generally speaking, will jump at any opportunity to potentially convert you to their side. So, if you engage with them respectfully, give them a chance to make their case, it will open up a great pathway for communication. 
This isn't to say that your ideas are actually equal - one side does actually have facts to back them up. I'm not a conspiracy theory apologist here, and I don't believe in giving platforms to misinformation or hate speech. But, if you are trying to change someone's mind, you have to start with respect.
Disclaimer: This does not apply to actively harmful beliefs that fall under the conspiracy theory umbrella. If your loved one's beliefs are predicated on the assumption that some people aren't people, respectful disagreement will not change their mind.
If they hold beliefs like this, you must challenge them.
Now, not all conspiracy theorists believe the mos t extreme versions of each conspiracy. So, second you need to determine exactly where your loved one lies on the conspiracy theory spectrum. What exactly do they believe? As you're listening, don't assume they're wrong, right off the bat. After all, they assume you are the incorrect one, and they could be right...
When they are explaining their beliefs, be sure to engage with them. Repeat their ideas back to them periodically, because this helps you to understand exactly what they're saying and it builds trust and rapport.
So...let's start with Flat Earth. Explain.
Well, I believe the earth is a flat plane that has a wall of ice surrounding it. Now, I don't believe that every planet is flat. Just the earth. And also I don't think that the stars are just blinking lights stuck up in the sky.
Basically, most of what we know about space is true. Planets are real, stars are real, etc.
So just the earth is flat, and there isn't, like, a dome or anything?
Nope.

The third step is where you actually start the debunking. If you have facts and figures on hand, use those. Show them where they might be incorrec - use phy, but also acknowledge where your own weaknesses lie. 
The best thing to do, here, is to use physical examples - something they can see with their own eyes. Math and science are really abstract and hard for a lot of people to wrap their heads around (maybe even including you yourself) so don't lean too hard on those if you don't have to.
One great tactic is to look at the extreme versions of their conspiracy beliefs. If they can see the errors in those more extreme arguments, they could start to turn that reflective eye onto themselves, in time. It a lso gives you the chance to show that you don't think your friend is crazy - you trust them and are willing to work with them against a common enemy.
Now, this dome thing. I've heard a lot of people talk about it. But you don't think they're correct?
No. See, a lot of us have shot rockets into the atmosphere. Now, most Flat Earthers do this so they can attempt to find the curve, but it's also so they can find the dome.
But, the thing is, no one has found the dome. We've shot things so high into the air that we should have found it by now.
But no one has.
Exactly.
So why do people still believe it?
*sigh* I don't know. They say they follow the scientific method, but every time their results come back negative, they just dismiss them out of hand. It's really frustrating.
Yeah, I can imagine...
*NOTHING HERE*

In the course of your discussion, they will probably come back at you with some arguments and facts of their own, and while you can debunk those if you want, arguing about the details isn't super productive. Pointing out their logical fallacies is something that a lot of internet debaters like to do, but it's not always productiv e, either. Ultimately, if you want to debunk their arguments, you need to go to the root of the issue. Look at the why behind their beliefs. Start at the most basic facts and premises of their position, then get to the details. If you can show them flaws in their base, then everything built on that base will start to crumble.
Pro-tip Time: Conspiracies often rest on several assumptions:
   1.    There is, somewhere, a (sometimes quite large) group of powerful people.
   2.    All of the people are working together.
   3.    All of the people are keeping their work a secret.
   4.    All of the people are willing to go against the public good.
   5.    All of the people are somehow doing all this while keeping up the veneer of normalcy.
Now think about every single group project you've ever done in your life.
...
Yeah. 
A lot of conspiracy theorists have a warped view of how the government and businesses and even just human nature work. It's all a lot less streamlined and efficient and organized than they imagine. Remind them of that.
Generally speaking, though, the best things to do are to give them physical evidence - examples they can see with their own eyes, feel with their own hands - and to point out hypocrisies in the messages from their side's "experts." If you can prove to them that they've been lied to by the people they thought they could trust, then they may lose faith in their conspiracy theory experts, and begin to trust the real experts, again. However, you need to be pretty careful with this, so it doesn't feel too much like an outright attack. Remember: Respect is key.

Y'know, Mark Sargent did a really cool experiment last month. Used a laser to prove that there isn't a curvature.
He's the guy who makes those YouTube videos, right? I think I've seen him before. He seems really charismatic, actually.
That experiment sounds interesting, too. Wanna go try it ourselves and see if we can replicate it? I have all the stuff in the garage.
You think he's wrong?
I mean...I don't think he's purposefully lying or anything. But if we have the stuff, it'd be cool to see it for ourselves, right?
Sure, sure. If you prove him wrong...
If he's right, I'll buy you a beer.
Uh huh. And if he's wrong, I'll eat my coat.

Finally, the most important - and hardest - thing to do, is to give them time. You can't expect people to change in front of your eyes. Especially when they're wrong. You just need to plant the seeds of truth - just give them your ideas, show them where their ideas might have some weaknesses - and then...leave it alone. People do most of their changing when they've had some time on their own to sit and think and reflect. The shame of being wrong is a powerful force, and feeling shame while in the presence of someone else can make people lash out. So...give them space.
Man, that experiment was really cool.
Yeah...I still don't think we did it right. I'll have to watch back the footage and double-check it.
Yeah, no problem.
*pause* well... I think I'm going to head out for now. I have a lot on my mind at the moment. But I'll come around later, okay?
See you later! And...good talk.
*smile*

Bottom line: Give them respect, give them facts, and give them time. 
But okay, let's say you can convince people they're wrong. But then they have to leave their in-group. What then? 
Conspiracy groups are like families. They care about each other, they listen to each other. Often, they're the only family each other has. They will do everything it takes not to lose each other. Many of them lost their first family by believing the conspiracy, and there's no assurance that their old family will take them back if they then decide to leave the conspiracy, so...They stay. 
They won't take the risk of ending up alone and alienated. Unless they know that there is solid ground on the other side, they won't make the jump. They can't lose the community they've built.
So, what can we do? We give them that solid ground. Give them evidence, yes, but more importantly, give them care, compassion, respect. Listen to them. Don't judge them or shame them or make fun of them. 
These people are curious, skeptical, critical thinkers. They question narratives and do experiments. They want to find answers that explain why bad and scary and absurd things happen in our world. All of these traits are good things that should be fostered. We need more people who question authority and put in the legwork to analyze and test different concepts.
When you work to change people's minds, you aren't getting them to stop questioning things. You're just getting them to use their skills and inquisitiveness to better ends. You're not turning off their curiosity, you're just redirecting it.
Conspiracy Theorists aren't more crazy or unintelligent or paranoid than any of us. They've gone through the same shit as the rest of us - they just found a different way out of it. 
Our job, as people who try to bring conspiracy theorists back to reality, is to show them that we care about them - we think they're wrong, but we care about them - and that we respect them.
Ultimately, the goal needs to be compassion. Being an asshole to someone - shaming them for what they believe - is never going to work. 
If you want to change the mind of a conspiracy theorist, you need to show t chem that you love them, and then be patient with them. It's hard, but...it's worth it.
*on computer, typing*
Hey!
Oh hey!
Whatcha doing?
Oh, just...responding to that comment thread. After talking to you, I realized I was kind of coming off as a bitch. 
So...your mission was a success, I guess.
Anyway, what's up?
I just wanted to tell you that I'm heading back to my own timeline here in a little bit.

Oh, really? Well I'll miss hanging out with you.
Yeah, me too. 
Oh wait, where's your coat? It's cold outside, you don't want to forget it.
Oh...*laughs* Yeah, about that... I'll explain on the way to the interdimensional portal. Wanna come?
*smiles* I'd love to.
Oh, and...yeah, can I borrow a coat? And maybe some pepto?
*confused* uh...sure. Of course.
Okay, let's go.

Conspiracy theories are complicated. The people who believe them are even more complicated. Conspiracy theorists are just like us - they see the same confusing, messy, scary shit that makes up our world, and then they come up with answers and solutions that differ from the official story. This isn't inherently a bad thing, either. It's good to question power structures. It's good to question what is given to us as truth. I wish more people were so curious and skeptical.
The problem comes when conspiracy theorists don't trust experts or consider evidence. When their confirmation bias gets in the way of their research. When they don't argue in good faith, or when they wall themselves off from anything outside their echo chamber.
And yeah, a lot of "rational thinkers" are guilty of this, too. But that's part of why I'm making this video. We need to do better.
The solutions I've offered have come from several different sources, all linked in the description below, and while a lot of these sources differed on the exact details, what they did agree on was the respect thing. You can't change someone's mind if there isn't mutual understanding.
Now, if you're doing internet debunking, this is a lot easier said than done. It's hard to form a respectful connection when you're not face-to-face, and when you don't know the other person personally. That doesn't mean it's impossible. It just means it's harder, and needs to be taken a little more delicately.
Another potential wrench is that conspiracy theorists often tend to move goalposts or dismiss your evidence outright. They only consider the evidence that supports them - everyone else is a shill. There isn't a ton you can do about that, except to be open and honest. And, this is another reason why showing them experiments - proof they can see with their own eyes - is so useful. It's a lot harder for them to dispute it.
These options are also not really useful when there is personal danger at risk, or if you are trying to implement system-level change. All of this advice is basically just for one-on-one interactions. But changing a single person is still an important, impactful thing.
So, before you accuse me of tone policing, I am not saying that niceness is all it takes. You don't keep fascists out of power by being friendly. 
What I am saying is that throwing around "conspiracy theorist" as a pejorative, being condescending, and using "debate-bro" tactics against your friends and family...ultimately does them more harm than good.
As I mentioned earlier, there is no one, single, foolproof option. Debunking is easy when it's just dunking on people you think are stupid, but when you actually respect the other people, it's actually really hard. But it's worth it. Every time, it's worth it. If you are honest, respectful, and patient, then you can change people's minds. All this world  needs is a little more love.

Thanks for sticking around to the end of the video!
This one was....a little different. But hopefully you all liked it. Please, please, please let me know what you think in the comments below. I'm kind of playing around with different ways of doing video essays, so your feedback helps me to know what works for you and what doesn't.
Anyway, if you liked this video, feel free to like and subscribe and do all the youtube things, and if you want more of me you can follow me on Twitter @Zoe underscore The Bee, and if you want to help me pay my bills, you can come join me on Patreon, link in the description. Memberships start at $2 a month, and you get cool things like polls and getting videos early and even getting custom-written poems from me, a published poet, so that's fun.
Again, I hope y'all enjoyed the video. Your support has been amazing, and I am so thankful for each and every one of you. Until next time, stay safe, stay warm, and I'll see y'all again, very soon, I hope. Bye guys.
You're Interpreting This Poem Wrong

There is a very famous poem that you've probably heard, and chances are...you've got it all wrong.
The poem I'm talking about is "The Road Not Taken" by Robert Frost. It's a well-known poem, and it's a favorite of high school English teachers and Instagram models everywhere. Because it's short, simple, and has a nice message of following your own path instead of just going with the crowd.........right? 
Well...it's not that simple. See, this is what I believe to be the most misinterpreted poem of all time. And I want to do my part as an English teacher and poet to right the wrongs and set the record straight about what this poem actually means.
So, without further ado, let's get started.

Okay, so before we can figure out what this poem "really means" I first want to address the elephant in the room. So, when it comes to analyzing literature, a lot of us grow up thinking there's a "right answer" that our teacher knows, and it's our job to figure out what it is. Then, when we escape the public school system, we realize that that's not the case. So then we swing to the other side of the spectrum. We think that there are no "right answers" and that any and every interpretation of a text is equally valid and right and all that matters is what something means to you.
And while that's great, it's not quite right. So, when you analyze something, there are interpretations that are more or less "right," but what determines that "rightness" isn't what your teacher says or even what the author says. It's what the text says.
If you think the words in the book or poem or whatever are good enough to prove your interpretation, then your interpretation is valid. The more evidence you have, the stronger your case is.
So, I'm not saying that my interpretation is correct, per se, just that it has a lot more support from the words of the poem than the common interpretation.
So what is the common interpretation? Well, if you look at the captions of Instagram models or motivational posters, the poem is about how, if you're given two choices  -  the popular choice or the unpopular one  -  you should follow forge your own path and go with something even if it's unpopular, because that will "make all the difference"  -  it will change your life.
And sure, if we look at the last few lines, that interpretation seems to be pretty well-substantiated, right? I mean, the poem literally says "I took the [road] less traveled by / And that has made all the difference." It's pretty straightforward, not a lot of room for interpretation.
Except I'm here to tell you that that interpretation is...not actually as well-supported as it appears.
So...what's the alternative? Well, to figure that out, we need to start at the beginning of the poem and work our way through. So I'm going to take each stanza and break it down into what it's showing us  -  just reading the words as they appear on the page, nothing more.
      Two roads diverged in a yellow wood,
      And sorry I could not travel both
      And be one traveler, long I stood
      And looked down one as far as I could
      To where it bent in the undergrowth;
Alright, so there's a guy standing in the woods at a fork in the road. He'd like to travel both of the roads, but he's just one guy, so he has to make a decision. So, he's looks down one of the paths to see if it's any good.
      Then took the other, as just as fair,
      And having perhaps the better claim,
      Because it was grassy and wanted wear;
      Though as for that the passing there
      Had worn them really about the same,
This stanza is where my interpretation of the poem starts to diverge (no pun intended) from the common interpretation. Here, he decides to take Path B (even though it's just as fair) because the grass isn't worn down. But then he says that the paths are "worn...really about the same." Well which is it? Are the paths the same? Or is one actually better than the other?? So what this stanza is doing is showing us that the speaker is unreliable. And that's important, so let's put a pin in that idea.
      And both that morning equally lay
      In leaves no step had trodden black.
      Oh, I kept the first for another day!
      Yet knowing how way leads on to way,
      I doubted if I should ever come back.
In this stanza, the speaker keeps thinking about that other path. He says that the two paths were "equal," but then implies that he still wants to go back and try that other path, but that he isn't sure if he'll ever come back, because, y'know...life happens.
      I shall be telling this with a sigh
      Somewhere ages and ages hence:
      Two roads diverged in a wood, and I -- 
      I took the one less traveled by,
      And that has made all the difference.
So now we have the famous final stanza. Here, the speaker is thinking forward to how taking this path is going to affect his life. He sees himself in the future, telling this story about how he took the path. And then we have a colon, which means that what comes next is the thing that this in the first line is referring to. So this is what he'll be telling people: He's going to tell them that there were two roads, and he took the one that wasn't as heavily traveled, and that that's how he got to where he is today.
So...what do we do with this? Now that we've read this and understand what it's saying, what does that mean for our interpretation? Well, let's compare what we know to what the common interpretation is. 
The common interpretation is that the poem is about how you need to be brave and go against the grain  -  take the path that isn't popular, the hard path, but the most rewarding path.
But is that actually what this poem is saying? Did our speaker actually do what people think he is saying he did?
Remember that idea I told you to put a pin in? Let's bring that back out. Our speaker is unreliable. He's indecisive and wishy-washy and impulsive. He chose a path kind of on a whim, without a great reason, couldn't really tell a difference between the paths to begin with, and spent a lot of energy after the fact thinking about how he kinda wants to know what's up with the path he didn't choose.
Does this sound like someone whose story you would trust?
Our speaker is an indecisive guy. And, honestly, the two paths were pretty much the same. He did not choose the one less traveled. Because the "path less traveled" doesn't actually exist.
"Okay, so why would he say that, then?" you might ask. Well, human brains really hate when things don't have clear causes and effects, and if we find a situation that we can't explain really well, we fill in the gaps ourselves. And on top of that, our brains think they're really rational. We think that our decision-making has clear cause and effect  -  we are all logical and rational and smart and everything we do is because we have a good reason for doing it. ...even if, in reality, we don't have a great reason for doing something.
That's what's happening in this poem. The speaker clearly didn't have a great reason for choosing his path  -  it wasn't prettier or clearer or more- or less-traveled. The paths were "just as fair", "really about the same", "equal".
But that decision feels arbitrary and our brains don't like that. Remember, we need to find reasons for things. Even if those reasons don't actually exist. So the speaker came up with a reason  -  either consciously or subconsciously, it doesn't really matter. His brain had to rationalize his decision, make it feel important, make his choice matter -- and it did that.
According to his brain, there was a difference between the paths. He had to make a choice. He was logical, rational, and an active participant in his own life. He made a choice. And that choice, according to his brain, made all the difference.

Now, like I said at the beginning, there are no hard-and-fast right-and-wrongs in literary interpretation and analysis. But there are interpretations that have more or less evidence for them. And this is one of those cases. There just isn't enough evidence for the common interpretation.
And this isn't a free pass to be an ass on the internet -- don't feel like you have to point out when people use this common interpretation as their Instagram caption or something. If anything, just share this video with them.
Sharing, liking, commenting, and subscribing really does help and -- just as a head's up, I will be posting a blooper-reel of times my cats interrupted me while filming when I reach 50 thousand subscribers, so if you want to help make that happen, then feel free to share this video with your friends!
Anyway, if you want more of my poetry hot-takes, or just want pictures of my dog, come follow me on Twitter at Zoe_theBee. And if you want to help me make more videos, come join us on Patreon, where you can get cool stuff like poems and polls and __secret___society_____ (insert bleep here, with 3s flashing on screen?)
And, until next time, stay safe, stay warm, and I will see y'all again soon, I hope. Bye folks 😊
What are English classes for? 
Intro
What are English classes for? Like, really, what's the point?
Every day on the news you hear about how such-and-such University is getting rid of their media studies major or their entire Literature Department, because the college administration wants to focus on more practical degrees that "improve students' earning potential". It's clear that universities often don't think that English classes are valuable, so it's not surprising that many students feel that way, too. A lot of people think that English classes are unimportant at best, and at worst...simply useless.
Now, of course I don't mean the elementary school "English classes" that teach basic reading and writing skills - I'm talking about the upper level high school and college English classes. The classes where you read literature and write papers and do rhetorical analyses and...all that stuff. 
A lot of people believe that all that stuff is pointless, especially now that the internet has come around and provided folks with autocorrect...along with endless answers to all their reading and writing-related questions. It really makes you wonder...what's the point? English classes aren't teaching you anything you couldn't learn on your own, so...
I was an English teacher for almost 5 years before I became a YouTuber, and I had to think about that question every day I was in the classroom. So let's explore it together and figure out once and for all: What is the point of English classes?

Body
There's a surprisingly large number of people who think that the internet has made English classes outdated and unnecessary. And on the one hand...that's not...totally wrong. You can just look up what the themes of As I Lay Dying are, and you can look up what "transitive verbs" are and how to use semicolons and how to write a good thesis statement. Hell, you can even have an AI program write your whole paper for you.
So...if we can get all this information from the internet, then what's the point? Why should we waste our time learning this stuff that Google or Grammarly can just do for us? Well, some people answer this question by proposing that we should just...get rid of English classes. This is the preferred position of many academic administrators, anti-intellectual politicians, and even many college students themselves. 
Speaking as someone who taught first-year Composition - the writing class that pretty much every single college student is required to take - I can confirm that most students don't want to have to take English. In their view, they can obviously read and write well enough to make it into college, and, their majors should be about what they're going to do as a career, so any general education requirements outside of that are a waste of their time. Now, the whole "are gen-ed classes a waste of time?" debate is...a whole other conversation for another time, but as more and more universities get rid of ther humanities programs, it's clear that many people think English classes have no point.
But I don't think this is right. And I'm not just saying this because I was an English teacher and I'm afraid of Grammarly taking my job or whatever (that is literally a comment I got on my Grammarly video. Hilarious stuff.) I'm saying this because English classes can give us something the internet can't.
There is a lot of valuable information on the internet. That's just objectively true. We have Sparknotes and the Purdue OWL and Thesaurus dot com and sites that can teach us the major themes of The Great Gatsby and how to write a good thesis statement. We even have things like Grammarly and Jordan Peterson's Writing App (and yes, Doctor Jordan B. Peterson has a writing app - I've tried it. Let me know in the comments if you want me to talk about it), and various AI tools like "YouWrite," that can give you feedback on your writing.
All of these websites and apps and programs definitely make it feel like English classes are unnecessary at this point. But they would only make English classes obsolete if they fully replaced what English classes have to offer, if English classes only taught grammar and spelling and finding "correct" interpretations and all those nitty-gritty mechanical functions that these tools excel at. 
And honestly, many students and administrators want English classes to focus on these "practical" skills, because that's what people think is "useful". If they're going to be required to take a writing class, they might as well get clear, objectively practical, useful skills out of it, like how to write a resume, right?
Now, if that's all English classes were for, then...yes, definitely, English classes have no point, and we can just get rid of them all and people can learn all that from the internet. And yeah, honestly, I don't think the best writing teacher in the world could teach you how to write a resume any better than a WikiHow article could.
But English classes aren't for just learning spelling and grammar and thesis statements and finding the "correct" interpretations of books and poems. Because humans don't learn by just memorizing how semicolons work, or the difference between subordinating and coordinating conjunctions, or what Emily Dickinson really meant when she capitalized that word. Humans learn by doing, by practicing, by experimenting and screwing up and trying again. And that's true of English just as much as it's true for science and math.
And that's what English classes offer that the internet doesn't. English classes give you a place to experiment with words - a place to write stuff, figure out whether it worked or not, and then figure out how you can write something next time that's more effective. English classes give you a place to read a book and ask "okay, but why did the author do this thing at the beginning?" or "wow, I really have a lot in common with this protagonist of this 300-year-old play!"
(And I know that some of you may have been in English classes that weren't like this, or maybe you had an English teacher that did put too much emphasis on grammar and finding the "correct meaning" of literature. If you had a class like that, I'm sorry. That's not how English classes should be, and you deserved better.)
The point of English classes is to teach what can't be learned from WikiHow or Sparknotes. They're for figuring out what writing process works best for you; how to ask questions - of each other, of texts, and of yourself; how to talk about texts; how to grow and learn and change and do things that are so new and wild and unheard of that no website has ever even considered it as an option.
So let's leave the resume-writing to WikiHow, okay?
The invention of calculators didn't make mathematics classes obsolete - math teachers just had to figure out how to work with those incredible new tools in their classrooms. The same is true of English. Yes, we can learn a lot of stuff on the internet. That's the whole point of the internet. But instead of being in denial about that fact, English teachers should be celebrating - there are all these amazing new tools that students can use to improve their reading and writing skills, all at their fingertips at the press of a button.
Because students can now somewhat automate the basic, mechanical English skills, that gives teachers more time to explore the skills that students can't get from the internet. Students can spend more time experimenting, figuring out their unique writing process, practicing asking questions of texts, and iterating on their methods.
In other words, they can spend more time doing the thing that English classes are there to teach them to do. And that...is the point. 

Outro
Thanks for sticking around til the end! Like I said in my last video, I'm experimenting with these shorter, less intensive kinds of videos, so please let me know what you think in the comments! I do have some things coming down the pipeline that are pretty fun and a little silly and I'm really excited for you all to see them, so be sure to subscribe to the channel so you don't miss them when they come out!
I also want to give a huge thank-you to my Patrons and Channel Members, whose names you can see scrolling here beside me. And I want to give an extra special thanks to A Tasty Snack, Adam, Andrew, Dylan, Jaded Flames, Justin Lowery, Robert Bradford, Science Punk Sellout, and Will Swanson - I truly wouldn't be able to do this without the support from you folks. Thank you so very much.
If you want to join these wonderful people in the credits, get early access to videos, or just want to support the channel, then check out my Patreon, linked in the description, or become a channel member by hitting the "join" button beside the subscribe button. 
But finally, we have our Patron Poem of the video. For CoolBusDriver, here is "Doubting Poet:"

Doubting Poet

I didn't want to write poems
      where I'm told to tangle tongues and beguile brains
      where every word carries more than its own weight
      where each choice I make is sheared into slices placed between glasses
            and inspected with a virologist's eye
                  looking not for gram-stained beauty,
                  but for those features that show you
                  how best to kill it
                  
I wanted to write poems
	where I'm asked to help set the table before dinner
	where my words sway in a maple-shaded hammock out back
	where my choices are held up to the sun like an apple
		in the plump fingers of the red-haired girl
			looking not for perfection
			but for how sweet it will taste
			on the tongue of her lover


And until next time - stay safe, stay warm, and I'll see y'all again soon, I hope. Bye, folks :) 
				
Willy Wonka | Eldritch Capitalism
WREN DISCLAIMER - do disclaimer at the beginning
Intro
"An adult engaged in writing a book for children may well intend to present a life-affirming vision that communicates cultural values and traditions, but at the same time that adult may consciously or unconsciously induce, even seduce, the child to accept and repeat the neurotic discontents of culture and civilization."
What if I told you that the beloved children's fiction character Willy Wonka...was evil? And I don't mean "secretly a serial killer" kind of evil. No, I'm talking about an evil that is much more insidious... Much more...mundane.
I want to tell you the story of Willy Wonka. You may think you know his story - you may think you know all about this eccentric genius, this beloved chocolatier and confectionary mad scientist. This man's story has been told in a book, a sequel to that book, a single chapter from a secret unwritten 3rd book, a film that was nothing like the book, a film that was a lot more like the book, an upcoming film on Wonka's backstory, not one, but two upcoming animated Netflix series, 2 video games, 3 stage productions, and at least one theme park ride.
But until you take all of these adaptations, dip them in a dream... and look at them for what they are - look at them for what they're really telling us - you don't really know the story. Each of these adaptations, as different as they may be, come together to form a mosaic that from a distance, shows us the real story of Willy Wonka.
Allow me to tell you four stories. Four stories that represent four sides of a many-sided man. Shall we?
[intro theme]
Put content warnings on screen: Body shaming / Fatphobia, Colonialism, Cruelty to children, Discussion of food & candy, Discussion of poverty, Johnny Depp clips, Racism, Religious fundamentalism
Wren Ad
But first, I want to tell you a little bit about today's sponsor, Wren, a Public Benefit Company committed to tackling the climate crisis head-on. When people like Mr. Scrumdiddly-smokestacks over here use their undue influence to pollute our planet, it can feel like there's not much we can do. But that's where Wren comes in.
Wren is a website where you can calculate your carbon footprint, figure out some ways you can reduce that footprint, then offset it by funding a diverse mix of carbon reduction projects like tree planting, mineral weathering and rainforest protection.
But climate change is a huge, system-level issue, and while individual actions can help, we also need systemic changes to actually curb the climate crisis. And Wren knows that. Which is why they have partnered with 2 climate policy groups that aim to track legislation, promote policies, advocate for new green technologies, and improve the transparency and integrity of climate change solutions.
My favorite of these projects is their support for the "Clean Air Task Force," which is an advocacy group that helps to promote system-level changes and they have a 25-year track record of being consistently rated as one of the best organizations fighting climate change. 
And with Wren, you can not only support this incredible organization, but any of their other awesome projects that promote conservation efforts and green technology innovations. One of their other project focuses is tree planting, and the first 100 people to sign up to Wren using my link will get 10 extra trees planted in their name.
Wren is doing real good in the world, and their business model is equitable and transparent, so when you sign up and start making contributions to projects, you know exactly where your money is going. Whether you want to just take the first step and focus on your personal choices, or make impactful structural changes through political action, Wren has you covered.
If this sounds up your alley, then click the link at the top of the description or in the pinned comment, and thanks again to Wren for sponsoring this video.
Now back to Wonka...
Part 1: Wonka the Candyman
Let me tell you the story of Willy Wonka, the chocolatier.
From his humble background as the son of a dentist, Wonka grew up with a love for inventing that was surpassed only by his love for chocolate. He had a face that was "alight with fun and laughter," and was "quick and sharp and full of life." In short, he was "an extraordinary little man."
And extraordinary is right; Wonka had decades of wild success as a candyman. He made magical candy - like ice cream that never melts, and bubblegum that can be blown up to huge sizes - in the largest factory known to man, and he shipped his goods all over the world. 
But all was not well in Wonkaland, because even though he kept his recipes under wraps, his competitors somehow got their grubby hands on his secrets, and started making their own unmeltable ice cream and bubblegum that can be blown up to immense sizes. And because Wonka was, above all, a capitalist, he simply did not suffer industrial espionage. So Wonka made the decision to lay off all of his workers and close the factory to quell the flood of secrets coming out of his business.
The factory remained closed for years. And then one day...the chocolate started flowing again. Out of nowhere. No one was rehired, and the factory was still closed to the public, but trucks came and went, and the world famous chocolate bars were back in stores. Wonka candy was loved by all, but the secrets of his factory remained a mystery. How did he continue making chocolates even though, as they say, no one ever goes in, and no one ever comes out?
Unbeknownst to the people of the world, Wonka had hired thousands of Oompa Loompas to work in his factory. He had saved them from the dangers of their native country, Loomaland, and brought them back to his factory, where he paid them in cocoa beans - a food that was not just delicious, but was precious to the Oompa Loompas.
Around this time, Wonka began to feel... Tired. He was getting older, and he knew he wouldn't be able to keep making chocolate forever, but alas, he had no children or other heirs to whom he could leave his business, the factory, and the Oompa Loompas. He needed to find someone he could trust, someone he knew was worthy of the candy empire he'd built. But who? And how?
One day, Wonka announced - out of the blue - that he was starting a contest. He would be hiding 5 Golden tickets in his Wonka bars, and whoever found the tickets would be welcomed into his factory for a tour and a chance to win a lifetime supply of Wonka chocolate. The world went wild. People bought out all the bars and developed underground black markets for chocolate. Wonka Mania had taken over.
The first four tickets went to Augustus Gloop (a boy from Germany who loved food), Veruca Salt (a wealthy heir to a nut fortune), Violet Beauregard (an American girl who was a gum-chewing athlete and veritable popstar), and Mike Teavee, who loved television and, according to some sources, may have actually cheated his way into his golden ticket by hacking Wonka's system.
The fifth and final ticket went to Charlie Bucket, a young boy who was the only child of an impoverished family who lived right down the street from the Wonka Factory. His grandpa Joe actually worked at the factory while it was open, and was part of the wave of workers who were fired. But even still, the whole family loved Willy Wonka, and Charlie loved him most of all. And because of Wonka's contest, he got to see his hero.
On the day of the tour, the children and their guardians went to the factory, and Wonka greeted them warmly. But not all the children were kind and respectful like Charlie. Augustus, Violet, and Veruca were all greedy, and Mike was ungrateful and disrespectful. In fact, the children were so bad that they actually injured themselves in the factory because they didn't respect Wonka's rules.
Augustus greedily drank from the chocolate river, then fell in and was almost turned into fudge. Violet selfishly grabbed a stick of magic chewing gum, which then turned her into a human-sized blueberry. Veruca demanded that her father buy one of Mr. Wonka's animals - either a trained nut-cracking squirrel or a golden-egg-laying goose - and when she didn't get what she wanted, she fell down into the garbage chute. And Mike arrogantly took control of the WonkaVision machine - an invention that could send chocolate by television - and was shrunk down to the size of a doll.
But Charlie Bucket didn't do any of those things. By the end of the tour, Charlie - the poor boy from just down the road, the boy who spent the last of his money on a Wonka bar, the boy who revered Mr. Wonka and just wanted to meet his hero - had won. And Charlie didn't just win a lifetime supply of chocolate but he also became Wonka's heir and will inherit the factory once Wonka retires.
His family came to live with him in the factory, and they even went on an adventure with Wonka in his Great Glass Elevator, and they lived, as they say, happily ever after.
Part 2: Wonka the Tycoon
Let me tell you the story of Willy Wonka, the candy tycoon.
But Zoe! - I hear you say - We know the story of Willy Wonka the chocolate tycoon. Isn't that just...the story?
Dear listener... While it may seem like the story of Wonka the candyman is the story of Wonka the tycoon, it is not. You don't know the story of Willy Wonka the chocolate tycoon. Because this confectioner - this industrial icon - is not just some wealthy business owner. He's not your average capitalist. He's...somehow... Much worse.
From his bourgeois upbringing as the son of a white-collar professional, Wonka grew up with a love for money that was surpassed only by his love for chocolate. He had a gold-topped walking cane and a wardrobe that screamed "old money".
And money...he certainly had. Wonka had grown up to become an industrialist. He started his company, he hired thousands of employees, he brought relative prosperity to the town where his factory was located. The factory chimneys belched out beautiful white smoke - the delicious breath of industry making its mark on the sky. He was a success.
But then... The leaks began. Wonka was the victim of industrial espionage. His beloved candy secrets - the magical recipes that had netted him his fortune - were escaping the factory. Someone was stealing the recipes and giving them to his competitors, and Wonka did not abide by theft.
Where weaker men would have rooted out the problem and only fired the individual culprits, Wonka knew that men were selfish and he would never truly be rid of spies as long as he employed common folk. So he did the only reasonable thing: He fired the entire workforce.
With all the bad workers out of the way, he needed some new, good workers. Workers who wouldn't question him, who wouldn't steal his secrets and give them to his competitors. So, like any good capitalist, he turned to the best and cheapest solution for labor: Slavery.
[on-screen content warning for lots of racism]
The Oompa Loompas were a race of African pygmies. Well, Wonka said they were African pygmies, but then, when he was told that that was racist, he changed his story and said instead they were just some non-human people who came from Loompaland. [make face at camera]
In any case, the Oompa Loompas were tiny people from a secluded jungle that was rife with monstrous creatures. And because Wonka is such a strong, brave, pragmatic man, he saved the poor Oompa Loompas from their plight and made a deal with them. A great deal. The best deal. A very...artful deal. 
He would pay them in cocoa beans - a product he'd already sourced and had regular shipments of - and in turn they would run the factory, and he wouldn't have to worry about paying actual wages to actual workers. So, the Oompa Loompas agreed, and followed him back to his factory. Or, as he put it, he imported them. Because, as we all know, workers are products to be imported, not actual people.
Anyway, the town surrounding his factory had fallen into ruin because the thousands of employees he'd had were now unemployed, and none of the money Wonka made was funneled back into the town's economy through people's wages. But Wonka didn't care about that. He wasn't in the business of charity. He was in the business of chocolate. And business was booming.
Where weaker men would have lowered their product's prices to compensate for having fewer overhead costs, Wonka did the only sensible thing: He kept his prices as high as ever. Only deserving children would be able to consume his magical products.
In fact, rather than lower the price of his chocolate bars, he developed an entirely new candy specifically for poor children. He made this: The Everlasting Gobstopper. A candy you can suck on forever and it'll never get any smaller. Why make your candy accessible to everyone, when you can just make different candies for different markets and purposefully exclude some groups from being able to buy your other candies?
While his Gobstopper was everlasting, Wonka himself was not. And though he had lived to a ripe old age, he knew that immortality technology was still a ways off, so he needed to find an heir.
Wonka knew that this heir needed to be a child, because "a grown-up [wouldn't] listen...he [wouldn't] learn. He [would] try to do things his own way and not [Wonka's.]"  And that's when he conceived of the Golden Ticket contest. 
This contest was a huge success in terms of the business. Wonka mania took hold, and sales were up by orders of magnitude. He was making money hand over fist. In fact, people were eating so much of his chocolate that they were getting more cavities than ever, which led to increased profits for the toothpaste factory in his town.
...These increased profits also meant the factory could automate its processes and the owners laid off a good portion of the workers, but - again - that wasn't Wonka's problem. He was making more money than he could spend in a hundred lifetimes - what did he care?
Now, in terms of finding a proper heir... The contest's success rate was...poor. The first four children were bad. Augustus and Violet were greedy. Now, as a capitalist, Wonka knew that greed was good. But as a businessman, he knew conspicuous consumption wasn't what he wanted out of an heir. 
These two children were the wrong kind of consumer. They had consumed correctly enough outside the factory - they'd paid for the candy fair and square; that was their right as customers - but inside the factory... Now they were grabbing and eating and consuming things that didn't belong to them. They hadn't paid for the ingredients or products; Wonka had. It was his. They stole from him. And for that, they were punished.
Veruca and Mike were bad for different reasons. These two tried to take over the means of producing candy. They tried to take his geese and his squirrels and his revolutionary new technology. They tried to take what was rightfully Wonka's. He was the candyman, not them. It was not theirs to take, and for that, they were punished.
But Charlie Bucket... Charlie Bucket was a good boy. And even better, he was a good consumer. Charlie hadn't gotten his ticket from his birthday candy bar that he always shared with his grandparents. Or from the ticket from the candy bar he bought with the money his grandfather so kindly lent him. No, he got the ticket from the candybar he bought immediately after buying a bar for himself, and himself only. A good consumer, indeed.
In fact, when Charlie told his mother he'd found the ticket, his mother told him his father would have been so proud of him. Proud of his son...for buying a Wonka Bar. Proud of him for being a consumer who did what he was told and didn't make a fuss about being poor, and put what little money he had back into the well-oiled machine that is the economy. 
And even on the tour, Charlie was quiet and didn't step out of line. He did as Wonka told him, didn't complain, played the game the way it was supposed to be played. Charlie was perfect. 
And because he was perfect, he won. He got to be the protege of Wonka and live the rest of his days in luxury. What happened to the other children? They were punished for their transgressions, of course. Severely punished. Because Wonka's factory is nothing if not a meritocracy. Those who deserve good things get good things. Those who deserve bad things get bad things. And those children got bad things...
And thus, the circle began again, with yet another young boy being raised in the upper echelons of society, being primed for his role as a bourgeois businessman whose sole goal in life is upward expansion and endless growth. He cut his teeth on profit margins and fudge, continued paying his workers in cocoa bean scrip, and the greedy, undeserving children grew up to be greedy, undeserving adults living greedy, undeserving lives.
In other words, things were as they are meant to be. With the power in the hands of those who deserved it. And they lived happily ever after. Well... Charlie did, anyway.
Part 3: Wonka the Trickster
Let me tell you the story of Willy Wonka... the trickster. From his draconian childhood as the son of a strict, unloving father, Wonka grew up with a knack for lying that was surpassed only by his knack for candy making. He was a clever man who had "a small, neat, pointed black beard, [and] his eyes  -  his eyes were most marvellously bright."
Now, I know what you're thinking. But Zoe! We know all about the dark side of Wonka. We know he's not actually the hero of the story!
We know that the factory is unsafe and we know how, if you look closely, as the group travels through the factory the number of seats on their transportation goes down, like Wonka knew that the kids were going to die, and some people even speculate that he's a serial killer who was knowingly luring all these kids to their deaths.
Well, dear listener - first of all, it's rude to interrupt - and second of all, that's a story about Mr. Wonka, but that is not the story we're going to be telling today. See, the unsafe nature of the factory isn't subtext... it's just... text. The factory is unsafe, and the children are injured...or worse. But that doesn't mean that Willy Wonka is a serial killer or that he was secretly planning on killing anyone when he sent out the tickets. Now, to be fair, according to some sources, Wonka... does... just actually...murder those kids. But I'm getting ahead of myself...
All of this is to say, while you may have heard some stories about a dark and dangerous version of Wonka, those have no bearing here. We're not going to talk about how he's secretly a serial killer or how Charlie Bucket actually grows up to be Wilfred from Snowpiercer - a theory that is somehow incredibly popular even though it holds as much water as eighty-year-old tissue-paper in a drought.
No, this is a story about Willy Wonka the trickster. And, as a trickster, Wonka wasn't dark and scary...not on the surface, at least. See, even before the Golden Ticket contest, the people absolutely loved Wonka. He was a great industrialist, a clever man, a hero to children and adults alike. The people loved him so much that his competitors took notice and tried to steal his recipes. 
Wonka may have been beloved, but he was not good.  When Wonka shut down his factory to stop the leaks, the town around him fell into ruin. And yet, he still thrived, because he knew the world was addicted to his chocolate - he knew the greed of men would keep his business afloat.
While Charlie Bucket's family was suffering under the poverty Wonka himself had created, Wonka was off in Africa using his finely honed powers of manipulation - a skill he had learned during his childhood of hiding candy from his father - to convince an entire population of indiginous people to leave their home and follow Wonka back to his.
When Wonka began the Golden Ticket contest, people only loved him more. Like the proverbial Pied Piper, Wonka used the powerful seduction of not just chocolate but a lifetime's supply of chocolate - more chocolate than any human could ever hope to eat - to lure children deep into his underworld - his underground factory made of imagination and childhood wishes.
It wasn't just children who were caught in his spell. Even when they knew it was a marketing stunt - and it was a marketing stunt; he was keenly aware of what he was doing, being the master manipulator that he was. Even when they knew it was a marketing stunt, Charlie Bucket's Grandparents called Wonka brilliant and a magician.
When the time came around for his Golden Ticket tour, Wonka took advantage of this adoration and introduced himself with a lie. He pretended to be an infirm old man, when he was really a spry, cunning, energetic old man. He came onto the scene with a song that could only be described as villain-esque, and then led his unsuspecting wards into a labyrinthine prison of his own design.
Like a fae creature stealing your name, Wonka convinced his guests to sign a contract that they had neither the time nor the ability to read. And once they had signed away their souls, that was when the mask began to slip. That is when the clever magician faded away, and the unfeeling trickster appeared. When the people's adoration...turned to fear...
At every opportunity during the tour, Wonka goaded not just the parents, but the children, too. He interrupted them, he talked circles around them, he gaslit them about their own knowledge and experience. And even when the children began to step out of line or bend the boundaries of the rules, Wonka didn't stop them. He barely feigned concern. 
And you might well think that Wonka hated these children. But he didn't. No, he felt something much worse: Indifference. To Willy Wonka, these children were playthings. They were pawns to be tortured and toyed with until they were worn down into nothing. Even the children's punishments weren't given by Wonka himself. No, he'd designed his factory specifically so each child would bring their punishments onto themselves. Their hubris would be their undoing.
And that's when his victims realized who - or what - he was. Appalled parents looked on as their children were maimed or killed. Children are literally torn apart or explode, leaving entrails on their parents, and Wonka responds with jokes, with banter.
Mike Teavee asked Wonka to continue the tour with the line "can't you just kill another kid so we can get to the prizes?". Charlie and Grandpa Joe, away from the group, pondered whether Wonka had actually caused harm to come to these children, and they concluded that "Mr. Wonka wouldn't do that" and "as long as [they] do what Mr. Wonka says, [they're] sure it'll be alright!" ...right?
It wasn't until Wonka's ire was focused on them directly that they turned on him. When Charlie and Grandpa Joe were the last contestants at the factory, Wonka discovered that they had stolen his Fizzy Lifting Drink while on their tour, and refused to give them the grand prize. Grandpa Joe became furious, and called Wonka a "cheat and a swindler," who "built up a little boy's dreams and then smashed them to pieces." He was "an inhuman monster."
But Charlie, being the naive child he is, gave the trickster a peace offering, and changed his mind. Once Wonka turned on the charm and gave Charlie the prize, the tides changed and the Buckets forgave him. He was back to being a hero.
When Wonka and the whole Bucket clan went on a trip in his Great Glass Elevator after the events of the Golden Ticket Tour, they got first-hand experience with this trickster, and it was only then that the rest of the family became fully aware of how manipulative he was.
And this constant back-and-forth - this will they, won't they; this "is he evil? did he actually do that? no, no, he's a candyman! a candyman wouldn't do that!"; this gaslighting and cruelty and manipulation...
That is the spirit of Willy Wonka.
Part 4: Wonka the Angry God
Now we're on the final leg of this journey, and I want to warn you now - if you're faint of heart, turn back now. Because after this... your life may never be the same... Let me tell you the story of Willy Wonka... the...God.
But Zoe! - I hear you say - ...what the fuck?
I know, I know, I said I wasn't going to humor those dark fan theories about how Wonka is secretly a serial killer or cannibal. And I'm not. Because those theories are built on nothing but vibes and our current culture's obsession with dark and gritty interpretations of kids' media. This... is not.
From his [redacted] training as the child of a [redacted], Wonka had a love for creating that was surpassed only by his love for [redacted]. He was an old man, but you wouldn't know it by looking at him. He looked spry and energetic, but was old. Very old. No one really knows how old.
No one remembered a time before Wonka. He - and his chocolate - had just always been there. His factory, too. Wonka had built the factory to be the largest in the world, and while that was years ago, somehow no one had yet built one that was bigger.
The factory was a land of pure imagination. A paradise. Heaven, even. See, long ago, some of his workers turned against him, and he cast them out, and instead populated his paradise with creatures known as Oompa Loompas. This chorus of cherubim ran the factory and followed orders from Wonka, keeping the chocolate flowing even when the doors were closed to outsiders.
Skeptics saw the factory producing chocolate without the old workers, and they came up with theories. Some even thought he was a necromancer, using dark magic to revive the dead as his workers. Clearly, Wonka's reputation preceded him. The people knew he was powerful, they knew he had no qualms with dark arts, and they weren't...entirely...wrong.
Wonka built his factory to be a paradise. But it wasn't the kind of paradise you may be thinking of. See, Wonka created his factory to be a place of indulgence. A place of consumption and feasting, but also a place of punishment. It was a garden of perfection...but only as long as you followed the rules. It was bright and colorful and cheerful...but all those colors hid the darkness that lay under the surface.
Eventually, Wonka decided to grant entrance into his factory to a select few - those who could prove their worthiness by finding his golden tickets. And because it was a candy factory, he placed the tickets in candy bars. Candy is most loved by children, and children, you see, are trusting. They have...faith. And Wonka fed on faith. The factory, he said, must be believed to be seen. In order to enter his kingdom, you had to believe.
But not all children were good. In fact, four of the five recipients were bad little children. Augustus was gluttony personified, who ate Wonka's magical chocolate without really understanding its quality. Veruca was a spoiled Russian ballerina whose father bought her everything she wanted, so she valued nothing. Violet was a self-centered popstar, and her father wanted her to be famous more than anything. And Mike Teavee was actually a juvenile delinquent, who had not only hacked his way into getting his ticket, but he was actively a worldly sinner, hoping to receive redemption - the ultimate prize - in paradise. Suffice it to say, they were all spoiled and greedy in one way or another.
But then, there was Charlie. Charlie - the chosen boy, the pious poor - the true believer. He loved Wonka, wanted to grow up to be just like him, wrote him letters and sang to him every night before bed, like a nightly prayer. 
And, once a year, the Bucket family held their traditional Wonka Bar ritual. On his birthday, Charlie and his family gathered, formed a circle around the communion steward, and began the rite of the Whipple Scrumptious Fudgemallow Delight:
      The slow, almost sensual unfurling of the silver wrapper, the anticipation that makes your mouth water as you think of that bar that snaps in your hand, leaving a touch of melted sweetness on your thumb, and when you place the succulent square between your lips, the rich velvet softens against your tongue, then presses against the roof of your mouth, before slowly sliding down your throat, leaving you warm and happy, but never satisfied...
But that year, Charlie didn't find his ticket in his birthday bar. Truly, he would never find his ticket in chocolate he shared with his family. Because, you see, Wonka devised his ticket contest so that only greed could truly grant you entrance into his kingdom. It was only when Charlie bought chocolate all for himself that he passed the test.
After nearly giving up hope of finding a ticket, Charlie was walking along the street, when divine intervention caused him to look down and spot...money. Money in the snow. Enough money for a week's worth of food or more. But Charlie, in a brief flash of selfishness, decided to spend it on chocolate.
And that was when he found his ticket. All he needed to get into Wonka's paradise was a little bit of good, old-fashioned greed. That was it. He was in. Charlie used the power of the golden ticket to resurrect his grandfather - the bed-ridden 96-year-old Joe Bucket - and together they went to the factory for their tour, along with the other five children and their guardians. Wonka introduced himself with a lie and a hymn about faith - an ominous song about seeing and believing - and in they went.
The first room that they entered was the Garden of Eating - the land where everything was edible and the children were given free reign to eat anything they could get their hands on... everything except one thing. They were forbidden from touching the literal lifeblood of the factory: the chocolate river.
Augustus Gloop, the boy whose greed manifested as gluttony, made this mistake of eating - or, more accurately, drinking - the forbidden product. And he fell in. As quickly as greed has granted him entrance into paradise, it also produced his exit.
      [And] like the cherubim who appear at the threshold of the Garden of Eden to signal and ensure Adam and Eve's exit from it in Genesis 3, the Oompa-Loompas appear[ed] whenever a child's transgression [got] him or her ejected from the factory. (Critical Reading of Food in Kids' Lit)
And so they sang of Augustus. They sang of his faults. They sang of his sins. And away he went. Down the tube. Down and down and down. Never to be seen again.
The fall of Augustus began the long, slow, painful process of punishing the remaining children. Next was Violet, who, like Augustus, had tainted the body and blood of Wonka's factory. By greedily grabbing the gum, she defiled the Eucharist and was, like Augustus, punished, sung out by the Oompa Loompas, and never seen again.
Veruca and Mike didn't commit sacrilege like their counterparts. Instead, they blasphemed:
      Rather than stealing the edible ends of Wonka's production, [they] attempt to obtain the control of the means of his production -- a nut-sorting squirrel and a teleporting television camera -- and thus continue the escalation from disobeying God for selfish pleasure alone to actually attempting to become like God. (Critical Reading of Food in Kids' Lit)
Both of those children, like the other two, ended up...away. They were punished, serenaded by the Oompa Loompas, and never seen again. 
These four children - Gluttonous Augustus, Greedy Veruca, Prideful Violet, and Wrathful Mike - represented all that was evil with the world. They represented the dirty mortal existence that had caused Wonka to close his factory to the world. And they were punished accordingly.
When those four awful, bad little children were gone...only Charlie was left.
Charlie proved himself to be a Good, pious child, and he was granted entrance into the upper floors. Where the other children were sent down, deeper into the earth, even to a fiery incinerator, Charlie was given access to the Great Glass Elevator and sent up and out.
Wonka brought Charlie to the room full of everything he'd ever wanted at the tip-top of the factory, and gave him unfettered access to everything - a permanent residence in paradise, and, like Adam and Even in the Garden of Eden, Charlie was also given dominion over the Oompa Loompas.
Even the tempter figure - the serpent, Slugworth, wanted to have the secret of Wonka's everlasting creation, and tempted the children to work for him. But in the end, just like the Christian devil who ultimately serves God's purposes, Slugworth is revealed to have been working for Wonka the whole time.
But what does it mean? What are the actual tenets of this faith? Wonka asked children to be greedy enough to find the tickets, but not so greedy as to take what belonged to him. He wanted  followers who quietly took what they were given - whatever they were given - cherished it, but didn't ask for more. 
Wonka - this chocolate god - wants children because they are faithful and don't question him. He wants perfect faith and obedience. He wants followers who will treat his chocolate with the reverence it deserves. Followers who will perform the rituals and consume and buy and eat and when they don't have enough to eat, they won't complain. And they won't ask for more.
He invites people - flawed people, yes, but still people - into his paradise, and then punishes them when they make mistakes. He metes out justice - whatever his perverse version of "justice" is - unilaterally and without mercy.
He's not God... Not in the Christian sense, anyway. And his heaven is not heaven.  He's not a benevolent God... He's something else. Something...worse.
      As ape of god, Wonka ever expands his universal kingdom, undermining the solid earth and providing, not daily bread, but daily sweets [only] for those who can buy them. Tunneling into the bowels of the earth, Wonka fills them with chocolate-producing machinery that will bring him the lucre with which to enlarge his realm. (Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and Other Excremental Visions)
Wonka is a god. But he is not a benevolent god. He  is not a god of goodness and light or a messiah here to forgive your sins. He is a dark god, darker than the purest cocoa and just as bitter. He is a god of industry and money. He's a god of all the dark, dank places deep below the earth.
He's a god of mischief and gluttony. A god of feast and famine. A god of starvation and desire, of sugar and the screams of children. He is the undying hunger, the vast, unknowable phantom of fudge.
Blessed is he, from whom all blessings flow - blessings both rich and bitter, both sweet and sour, both bite-sized and everlasting. Blessed is he, Willy Wonka, son of Wilbur Wonka, slayer of whangdoodles, captor of Oompa Loompas, prince of dark chocolate...
Praise be to Him.
Amen
What Does it All Mean?
"An adult engaged in writing a book for children may well intend to present a life-affirming vision that communicates cultural values and traditions, but at the same time that adult may consciously or unconsciously induce, even seduce, the child to accept and repeat the neurotic discontents of culture and civilization." (Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and Other Excremental Visions)
I opened the video with this quote because this video wasn't supposed to be like this. In all honesty, I started writing this video with the simple goal of just talking about why Willy Wonka isn't actually a good billionaire. It was going to be the first in a series of videos about wealthy characters in kids' stories and analyzing whether they're good or bad.
But as I got further and further into the source material - the Broadway musical especially - I realized that, for this story at least, the question wasn't as simple as "Is Wonka good or bad?" Because Wonka isn't just good or bad. He's...enigmatic and complicated and multi-faceted and weird.
I even considered ignoring that source material and just pretending that the movie or the book were the only things that existed. Because that'd be fun, right? People on the internet love silly little analyses of kids' media, so I should just talk about how Wonka had slaves and killed kids so he's bad, actually. #Cancelled.
Well, obviously I didn't make that video, so I don't think that's true. I made this video because I think we have a lot to learn from kids' media. Because, like Bosmajian says, even if writers try to teach good lessons with their books, all art is a product of its time, and it's inescapable. There's nothing you can do about it. Culture and society and unconscious biases leak in. Always.
But the good news is that that means we can use art as a mirror, and that's what I wanted to do with this video. "What is it that the character of Willy Wonka and the story of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory say about us?"
What does it say about us that we feel this gross satisfaction whenever bratty, spoiled kids "get what's coming to them"? What does it say about us that no one questions Wonka's "importation" of the Oompa Loompas, and when we hear Veruca demand that her father buys her one we just think wow, she's a brat, and not wow, that's literal slavery! What does it say about our culture that we equate consuming with morality? 
What does it say that Charlie is a perfect consumer, that it's not heroics that win him his prize, but his poverty and piety - the fact that he is starving but he never asks for more - that makes him good enough to enter the kingdom of chocolate at the right hand of the Wonka.
We live in a world where Charlie Bucket lived within sight of a chocolate-producing factory and only afford to eat chocolate once a year. He was starving. In the books, he had to literally ration his energy so he wouldn't pass out during school. And he lived just down the street from a factory that produced luxury food items. And we don't question it. As readers, we don't blame Wonka. But I'm here to ask: ...is there anyone else to blame?
Consumerism / Commodification
This story reflects our rampant consumerism and the commodification of...everything. In Wonka's factory, everything, even the literal grass and rocks become not food, but candy. No longer is the earth a bread basket that provides us with nutrients; instead, it has become a land of sugar highs and the inevitable crashes. It provides us with empty calories, leaving us with brittle bones and a gnawing hunger for something real.
But all we get is a facsimile, the suggestion of something real. And this is true of the actual, real-life Wonka candy, too. We're shown this incredible candy in the movie - these beautiful chocolate bars with whimsical names, this magical everlasting gobstopper - but...they're all fake. They don't exist. 
A couple of the less-popular ones were around for a few years, but now... the Wonka brand has been sold off so many times that most of the candy just...doesn't exist, outside of jawbreakers and Laffy Taffy - two candies that, let's be honest, aren't super great. At least not compared to the literal magic candy from the movies that these two real candies came from.
And that's to say nothing of the commodification of the Wonka story itself. We have a story about consuming that has, itself, become an object of consumption. The original book has spawned sequels and film adaptations and musicals and video games and Netflix shows and a prequel and theme park rides. 
Just like a potato chip brand that periodically comes out with cool new flavors that you just have to try, more and more...so does our art.
      As Charlie and the Chocolate Factory enters the twenty-first century, its identity as a family of diverse, mass-marketed products rather than as a single text attests to the effects of commodification on its messages about consumption. [The] consumption of food dramatized in Dahl's text is swallowed by the proliferating activity of consuming the products associated with it ... Increasingly, reading the book, or even watching the original film adaptation, is just one event in an interrelated group of events which become self-referential, pointing not to a cultural and religious identity outside of themselves but to the very act of ingesting media as a perpetually satisfying endeavor. (A Consuming Tradition: Candy and Socio-religious Identity Formation in Roald Dahl's Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, Robert M. Kachur)
(aside: We've had the MCU and the DCEU, now get ready for the WWU - the Willy Wonka extended Universe. God, we live in the bad timeline.)
We're being primed for consuming. We're being taught that being a consumer is something worth being proud of. Charlie gets the Golden Ticket like it's an accomplishment of something great, instead of just being luck - luck that, like his grandfather says, isn't really equal. If you can buy chances of winning, then those with more money get more chances. 
And yet, Charlie's consumption is seen as good. Because he was a quiet, docile consumer who did what he was told and didn't make a fuss about being poor - because he spent the last of his money on candy - he won. As they say, you gotta spend money to make money.
Rotten Children Die
The story also highlights just how much we hate what we see as greed, gluttony, unfairness, or unjustified success. When people think about Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, the first thing they think of is what the fuck happens to those kids??
And while, yeah, it is a little extreme - remember, children literally explode and get ripped apart in the Broadway version - it's worth thinking about why that's such an important part of the book and films. In every adaptation, not only are whole scenes dedicated to the children's mistakes and subsequent punishments, but we also get Oompa Loompa songs that punctuate every single child-maiming.
So... Why do we hate them? Why do our hero's family members - characters we are sympathetic toward - immediately after being introduced to the four "bad" children, decide they are simply terrible and unworthy?
Well, for one, we have the absolute fatphobia exhibited toward Augustus Gloop by literally everyone in every adaptation. We see this fat child and immediately assume that he is gluttonous and morally inferior. He can't restrain himself from eating, so he deserves our derision.
We also have children getting things we've decided they "don't deserve" - Augustus is fat, so he doesn't need any more food. Veruca is rich, so she doesn't need free candy. Violet is so full of herself, she only wants the gum because she wants to be the first person to eat it, not because she actually cares about the invention. Same with Mike - he doesn't actually care about candy, he just cares about the next interesting thing.
Because they get things they don't need or deserve, they get punished. And we love to see them punished (even if it really was the parents' fault for raising their kids like that and not the fault of the kids themselves). We love when people get their just desserts. Especially when the punishment fits the crime. That's what makes Wonka's punishments so deliciously sweet. ...well...that, and the sugar.
This is also related to why we root for Charlie. He's poor (so he needs things), and he's kind (so he deserves to get those things). It's the mythical good poor person who doesn't spend their money on "frivolous" things like ponies or avocado toast - remember, he only gets one chocolate bar a year - combined with the myth of meritocracy. Good people deserve good things. If bad people get good things, it puts the whole system on its head. We can't have that. Good people get good things. And Charlie Bucket is a good person.
      We want to see Charlie rewarded for his virtue, hi s goodness. The Golden Ticket offers him this reward. Charlie has a chance to receive happiness in proportion to his virtue. ... Charlie incites in us our demand that the good be rewarded and given what they deserve and the wicked punished. Charlie makes us want to demand justice [and] Wonka provides it. The story provides a glimpse into that world where we may hope for justice, where we're allowed to believe the lie that it will be all right in the end. (On Getting Our Just Desserts)
But let us dare to ask... What is justice worth when those children are seen as "wicked"? What makes them wicked? That they're flawed? That they happened to be born to parents who raised them with certain less-than-stellar values? That they were raised in a society that values consumerism and consumption and they - a bunch of children, I remind you - internalized it? 
These children are spoiled and irritating and grating beyond belief. But does that mean they're worthy of our hatred? If being fat or wanting stuff or being proud of yourself or spending too much time on your phone or in front of the tv condemns you to death???? Let he who is without sin throw that first stone.
Sit Down and Shut Up
Whether those children are genuinely bad or not, Charlie is still unequivocally good. But what actually makes him good? Really. What makes him worthy of being our protagonist, and what does it say about us that we see him as the story's hero?
In the story, Charlie's goodness comes from sitting down and shutting up. He's a quiet boy from a poor family, with no real notable qualities. The 2005 film even opens with a line about how he's "not smarter or faster or more clever than other children. His family was not rich or powerful or well-connected." 
And, most importantly, he doesn't speak up or speak out. He doesn't complain about literally starving to death. And above all, he reveres Wonka. He thinks Wonka can do no wrong. Charlie Bucket is a blank slate.
And that is, of course, exactly what Wonka wants:
      Charlie Bucket...is the quintessence of the deprived empty ego and, therefore, a colorless docile hero, an uninteresting simpleton, a Charlie who will not threaten Wonka's egocentric trickster-self. Wonka wants an heir who is willing to listen and learn without having opinions of his own... Charlie's ego is a bucket, willing to receive. (Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and Other Excremental Visions)
But to the reader, why is Charlie a hero? Why do we care so much about this kid? We're used to our stories following a hero's journey, where the protagonist faces challenges and has to change or grow to overcome them, but "Charlie encounters no obstacles [and] needs no heroics, for poverty, ego-lessness, and passivity are his virtues" (Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and Other Excremental Visions). 
In other words, Charlie's lack of qualities - his lack of money, his lack of tenacity, his lack of an opinion, his lack of anything that would make him stand out - is what makes him a hero.
Our society values people who fit in. We value sitting down and shutting up, doing what you're told, falling in line, keeping on that grind. What we don't want is people who buck the system. The system is there for a reason; we need to maintain the system. If you go against the grain - if you don't fit beauty standards, if you get something you don't deserve, if you have too much of an ego and think you don't have to follow the rules of the system, if your interests fall outside what's "normal" - you're deviant.
      Each of the naughty children is eliminated based on his or her individual "quirks" [but] Charlie's comparative lack of vitality and uniqueness...[is] what makes Charlie the perfect candidate to take over Wonka's factory.... Charlie's lack of individuality is what allows him to slip into the background, join Wonka in his observation and judgment of the other children's failures, and then emerge triumphantly as the winner. ... Charlie and the Chocolate Factory is not a rebellious celebration of childhood quirkiness but a moralistic celebration (and preservation) of societal order. Childish rebelliousness is ultimately quashed by a Foucaultian system of discipline and punishment. ("He Will be Altered Quite a Bit")
Charlie's only good trait is that he has no traits at all. We want him to win unimaginable riches because he didn't complain about being poor. We don't want people who complain or want things to change. We want people who love the system, even as it kills them.
Colonialism is Unquestioned
Speaking of systems that kill people... [content warning] 
Willy Wonka's story also highlights just how invisible colonialism is to a lot of us. Wonka is a literal white savior - a wealthy white guy goes to the jungle looking for exotic plants and "saves" a bunch of indiginous people from the dangers of their homeland - the place they've presumably been living for thousands of years - and then brings them back to his factory - where they conveniently can never leave - and puts them to work doing sometimes really dangerous work for literally no money. 
The Oompa Loompas are slaves. And what's worse, they're slaves who we are told actually love doing the work. They're happy here, we swear! They sing and dance all the time, and yeah, we don't pay them, but we give them food and a place to live!
It's disgusting. And no one questions it. Say what you will about the 2005 adaptation, but it did do a good job of highlighting - purposefully or not - some of these issues:
      Burton makes explicit the story's colonial undertones and encourages the audience to consider the alienation of the modern industrial worker. Burton's Oompa-Loompas share a single brown face, capturing both the interchangeability of workers and the suppression of individual identity demanded by efficient production. (Willy Wonka and the Imperial Chocolate Factory)
But Wonka is a hero. He's a man who we're taught not to question. So we don't question this, either. But even if we didn't know to question it in this story, we can question it in the real world. Because this kind of thing still happens today.
Some chocolate today, in 2022, is being harvested using slave labor. Now, I'm not going to name any names because I don't want to get in trouble for libel or defamation, but I have links in the description to the Slave Free Chocolate website if you want to learn more about that.
All of this is to say, the myth of the candyman who uses slave labor to make candy for a bunch of white kids? It's not a myth. It's much more real than we'd like to admit. But now that we know about it, now that it's been illuminated for us, we can start to do something about it.
Systemic Issues
A lot of  these problems are pretty big. They're systemic issues that are hard to fix, especially as individuals. And even Charlie, the fancy new face of Wonka chocolate, doesn't have the power to fix things. Because while Wonka is to blame for a lot of the events in the story, the problem he represents isn't an individual problem. It's a systemic one:
      You may say, "Well, Wonka's not in charge anymore. He gave the factory to Charlie. Charlie is a sweet boy; he'll be better." No... The problem is systemic. Regardless of who's in charge or how benevolent they might be, the harsh reality is that the global marketplace requires more exacting efficiency and product saturation than ever before. (Willy Wonka and the Imperial Chocolate Factory)
Even if Charlie was the best boy in the world, he still wouldn't be a match for global capitalism, a force that necessitates exploitation. And that's part of what makes Charlie's "win" so meaningless. He was one poor child in a world full of poor children. The only thing that made Charlie special was that he happened to get the golden ticket. He was lucky. And his individual luck isn't going to magically lift millions of other, less lucky people out of poverty. It helped his family. It didn't actually solve the issue that made his family poor in the first place.
In the Broadway musical, as the children are lining up at the factory gates, preparing to go in, and the newscasters are interviewing them, something interesting happens. Right after they've finished chatting with Charlie - the final interviewee - the news guy comments on how malnourished Charlie looks, and starts to say "poverty is such a terrible thing" but then gets interrupted by Wonka's arrival. Wonka coming onto the scene stopped any discussion of poverty. And if that's not a metaphor for this entire thing then I don't know what is. 
It's like these stories came so close to actually saying something real about systemic issues around income inequality and poverty and capitalism, but just...didn't. The story lays bare a lot of these more shameful elements of our society, but while the creators don't use that as an opportunity to make any kind of larger statements, we can. This story shows us difficult truths about ourselves and our society, but...the good news...is that it's a fun story with wacky characters, so looking at those difficult truths becomes just a little bit easier.
Or, as Ron Novy puts it:
      Charlie and the Chocolate Factory is a fun story. But behind the story are assumptions about how the world is or perhaps should be. These assumptions create, or rather reproduce, a world of white Western privilege in which a "savage," diminutive race of people is exploited by a business owner for his own profit. But it's excusable because they seem to be happy. Although some may think critiquing Dahl's classic on these grounds is taking the book too seriously for a piece of children's literature, our acceptance of this scenario, or our inability to see it for what it is, speaks to the need to have this discussion. The invisibility of the racism and the colonial assumptions in this story speaks to how readily we accept the idea of Western white exceptionalism and are dismissive of the needs and the value of native people. That's a problem. Our world, like Dahl's story, is built on assumptions, and some of these have real consequences, like slave labor, child labor, and exploitation. These need to be laid bare and questioned. Perhaps doing so while thinking about Willy Wonka will make it a little bit easier. (Willy Wonka and the Imperial Chocolate Factory)
In other words, a spoonful of sugar really helps the anti-capitalism go down.
Conclusion (and Some Good Things)
Not everything is doom and gloom. There are some good things to be learned from these stories, and there are some parts of the adaptations that I genuinely really liked.
Charlie Bucket - in all of the adaptations except for the Broadway musical - is just a joy. He's a good kid played by a good actor, and he really does capture that sense of childhood wonder. He may be a bit boring at times - like in the 2005 film, Charlie is just a total blank slate. He doesn't learn anything or grow. - but he's adorable and charming so he's allowed to be boring.
The Bucket family as a whole is also pretty great. While some of the grandparents can be kind of grumpy, they're like 90, so they're allowed to not be super into everything all the time. One of the nice things about Charlie being the hero is that the story doesn't shy away from the value of elders and generational knowledge. Charlie's grandparents are a constant source of support and wisdom, and the closeness of their family is just super.
I also really like the line from the 2005 film, "Candy doesn't have to have a point. That's why it's candy." I think it does a great job of capturing the whimsy that was there in the original book, and it also almost takes away some of the cultural power that candy has in the film, which is an interesting choice.
And it's impossible to talk about these movies and musicals without mentioning the music. These films and shows have great, catchy songs, and all the artists did a phenomenal job, so shoutouts to Leslie Bricusse, Anthony Newly, Marc Shaiman, Scott Wittman, and Danny Elfman - wow, three dudes with "man" in their last name. That's funny.
Also, last but not least... The most important and best thing... The edible grass in the factory... It's a special kind of mint candy that Wonka invented, and it's called... swudge. SWUDGE! What a marvelous word. Swudge.
And don't forget, Wonka's story isn't over. There's a movie coming out next year and two Netflix series - one an adaptation of the book, and the other an original story about the Oompa Loompas. And some creators would worry that those would make a video quickly outdated, but I think - on the contrary - that this video will be even more relevant once those come out. Because who knows what kind of Wonkas those stories are going to show us?
We could get a whole new Willy Wonka... Or we could just get a new version of these old faces. In either case, more Wonka means more information. It means more portraits that we can tear up and paste together to form a new mosaic. 
So, please. Take what you've learned from this video, and when you go see the new movie or when you watch the Netflix shows, think about what kind of Willy Wonka you're getting, and what that Willy Wonka says about the culture that created him. And then, of course... Just enjoy the show.
Outro and Poem
[stick around after the credits to see russian squirrels tear apart a ballerina]
Thanks for sticking around til the end of the video! This one got way out of hand, actually. It was supposed to be on the shorter end and it was supposed to be light and fun and just a little analysis of this Bad Fictional Billionaire, but instead we got...this. So I really hope you enjoyed it, and if you did, feel free to share it and like and subscribe and comment and ring the bell and do all those YouTube things.
That being said, I am considering still doing some other videos on other fictional billionaires, like the guy from Robots and the family in Meet the Robinsons, so let me know if you want me to do those - I promise they won't be this huge, I could not handle it if they did, so...
ALSO, if you're watching this when it comes out, then I want to let you know that I'm going to be hosting a livestream this Sunday, that's two days from when this was posted, around 3pm eastern time. I'm going to be eating incredibly sour candy and reading silly Willy Wonka fan theories and answering your questions about this video, so be sure to stop on by if that sounds fun!
And if you're watching this from the future, then that stream vod should be in my Livestreams playlist, which I will have linked in the description and the end screen and maybe even a card here, if I remember to put that in. But if you want to stay up-to-date with when I'm doing streams, or if you just want to see pictures of all the lizards and frogs I find in my yard, then you can go follow me on Twitter at Zoe_theBee.
Anyway, I think that's all the housekeeping, so I also want to give a huge thanks to my Patrons and YouTube channel members, whose names you can see scrolling here beside me. As well as a thanks to Aranock and Mainely Mandy for helping me hone some of my ideas here. I also want to give an extra special thanks to:
A Tasty Snack, Adam, Andrew, Dylan, JadedFlames, Justin Lowery, Robert Bradford, Science Punk Sellout, and Will Swanson. Thank you so very much! If you want to join these wonderful people, then you can join over on Patreon at patreon.com/zoe_bee, or you can become a channel member by clicking the join button down there beside the subscribe button, and you can get cool stuff like early access to videos and having an end-of-video poem written just for you!
Speaking of, it's time for our Patron Poem of the Video. For consilium here is "no returns"

no returns

I root for the vines
that clamber and claw
across the corpses of capitalism
the memories of wealth
and specters of industry
once standing proud at
intersections and turnpikes
now return to the earth
and repent

